 
A Chemically Defined Synthetic Cell Capable Of Growth And Replication 
Nathaniel J. Gaut1, Christopher Deich1, Brock Cash1, Tanner Hoog1, Aaron E. Engelhart1, Katarzyna P. 
Adamala1* 
 
1 Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN US. 
*Correspondence to: kadamala@umn.edu  
 
 
Abstract 
Cells are the fundamental unit of life. Yet there is no natural cell for which all its life-essential functions 
are understood. Here we demonstrate a complete cell cycle for a synthetic cell undergoing selection, 
with genome replication, growth, resource acquisition via feeding, and genetically encoded division. The 
cell is encoded via a 90kb genome that includes functions needed for resource uptake, transcription, 
translation, growth, genome replication, and division. The resulting synthetic cell is sufficiently 
encouraging to support routinization of synthetic cell engineering workflows, and will ultimately 
underlie diverse applications across all of biotechnology.  
 
Introduction 
One of the most ambitious and fascinating goals of bioengineering is to build a biochemical system that 
could cross the threshold from chemistry to life. 1–3.  
Significant progress has been made towards construction of a minimal living synthetic cell4,5, including 
approaches based on minimizing natural living organism6, and efforts starting with non-living 
components7.  Yet, no synthetic cell created from chemically-defined non-living components, has been 
shown to implement most life essential functions, be fully controllable, and described in full operational 
detail.8 
Here, we present a synthetic minimal cell with fully defined 90kbp genome, undergoing multiple 
generations of cell cycle, selection and reproduction. The resulting gives insights into the minimum 
components necessary for life9. Such a cell may also ultimately inspire a chassis that can be adapted for 
a variety of purposes10, framing a foundation for fully artificial organisms.11,12  
Our work addresses a key challenge in constructing minimal cells exhibiting life-like properties: coupling 
of growth and division to gene expression. The synthetic cell presented here contains a chemically 
defined cell-free translation system encapsulated in liposomes. We then combine several previously 
demonstrated technologies, including genome replication, with new demonstrations of genetically 
encoded growth and division, selection, and competition for resources.  
To start, the central dogma of biology can be reconstituted using two major methods: TxTl (translation 
system based on whole cell extracts13,14) and PURE (Protein Synthesis using Recombinant Elements15). 
Unlike TxTl, PURE is a defined reaction mixture, with all the components and their concentrations 
known. Thus, we used PURE, except for early experiments establishing the feeding mechanism (TxTl is 
used on Figure 2 and SI figures related to Figure 2, PURE is used in the rest of the work). 
DNA replication in liposomes and extracts has been achieved with the complex bacterial replisome16,17, 
or by a more streamlined method of TTcDR (Transcription-Translation coupled DNA Replication)18. The 
latter is based on the replicase from the Bacillus subtilis phage Phi29 19. We used the Phi29 replicase to 
carry out rolling circle amplification of the plasmids constituting the genome of our synthetic cell18,20. 
Feeding, supply or acquisition of material and energy, is essential for life. Liposomes can be grown by 
fusion, using peptide21 and nucleic acid tags22–24, lipid composition 25, UV,26 or membrane tension27. 
Synthetic cells can also grow via synthesis of lipids inside the liposome28–31, coupled with DNA 
replication32, or with lipids from outside the liposome33,34. We implemented feeding by fusion of 
nanovesicles directed by peptide tags. The targeting of fusion is directed by a protein encoded and 
expressed by the synthetic cell; growth is thus regulated from the genome, coupling metabolic activity 
to growth and fitness. 
Selection is another hallmark of life. Artificial selection has been demonstrated in liposomes 35, or in 
water-oil emulsions 36. Here, we show coupling of the selection trait to synthetic cell growth, enabling 
selection via differences in the synthetic cell genome. A mutation that results in production of more 
protein responsible for growth, enables cells with that mutation to grow bigger. More growth results in 
more daughter cells, thus spreading the mutation through the population. 
Prior analysis has speculated that a minimal genome for a living cell could be as small as 113kbp.37 The 
synthetic cells presented here encode a 90kbp genome.   
Self-replication is another goal of synthetic cell engineering38,39. Several mechanisms for achieving 
growth and division have been proposed40–42. Recent progress demonstrated reconstitution of protein 
cytoskeleton43–46, polymer hybrid vesicles47, and membrane deformation based on nucleic acids48,49, 
DNA-peptide structures50, and other chemistries51,52. Here, utilizing mechanisms based on membrane 
fission induced by surface protein crowding53,54, we have achieved genetically encoded synthetic cell 
division in the absence of cytoskeleton.  
Taken together, we demonstrate the first minimal cell with a cell cycle, genetically encoded growth 
and division, all coupled to selection and competition. The synthetic cells undergo gene expression via 
PURE, genome replication via Phi29, and genetically encoded processes of membrane growth, feeding, 
and division. The introduction of mutation increasing expression of the protein needed for feeding 
results in faster growth and more daughter cells. This allows for the spread of advantageous mutation 
through the population, demonstrating selection. (Figure 1) 
We demonstrated five generations of the overall cell cycle including DNA replication, feeding, and 
growth (Figure 3), first tested with mechanical division - to ensure high efficiency of replication. Utilizing 
this cell cycle, we introduced an advantageous mutation, increasing expression of the protein 
responsible for growth. Over several generations, the cells containing the beneficial mutation 
produced more daughter cells, demonstrating the spread of the advantageous mutation in the 
population, and thus an example of selection (Figure 4). When cells compete for food in a resource-
limited environment, faster growing cells produce more offspring than the slower growers as food 
becomes scarcer – illustrating competition for resources driving faster selection. (Figure 5) Then we 
engineered a genetically encoded division mechanism, enabling direct link of the genotype of synthetic 
cell to the number of offspring. (Figure 6) Finally, coupling genetically encoded growth and division 
resulted in synthetic cells that can feed, grow, and divide. 
 
Results and Discussion 
Synthetic cells in this work are liposomes containing DNA genome encoded across seven plasmids, and 
in vitro protein expression system. Unless otherwise stated, all proteins are expressed inside the 
synthetic cell.  
The synthetic cells presented herein have a defined chemical composition at the time of formation, with 
known concentration of components making up the cell, starting from the PURE system)  
Our synthetic cells divide without cytoskeleton. Division is first achieved by mechanical extrusion 
through a membrane filter (Figures 3, 4 and 5). Ultimately, we demonstrate genetically encoded division 
as a result of membrane protein interactions (Figure 6). The summary of major findings is in Table S1.  
 
 
Genetically encoded liposome fusion leads to growth  
Our synthetic cells have a very limited metabolism55 and cannot make ribosomes;56 complete metabolic 
independence will require a larger genome 37. To engineer a complete cell cycle with a smaller genome, 
we needed a method for feeding enzymes, small molecules, ribosomes, and lipids, to grow and sustain 
synthetic cells. We achieved that using small “feeder” liposomes as a source of both lipids for membrane 
growth, and other molecules. The small molecule nutrients were replenished both by feeder liposomes, 
and by membrane transport from external medium. We engineered a method of fusion of synthetic cells 
with feeder liposomes, based on expression of a protein inside the cell, thus making the growth and 
feeding genetically encoded.  
To engineer genetically encoded liposome fusion, we first needed proof of principle: evidence that a 
small peptide tag on the membrane will enable fusion. We used a 6xHis tag embedded in an externally 
delivered trans-membrane peptide domain (Supplementary text section 1, “His tag mediated liposome 
fusion leads to growth”).  
After establishing that 6xHis tags embedded in the membrane can facilitate fusion, we needed a way for 
the His tag made inside synthetic cells to be displayed on the surface.  
A membrane pore α-hemolysin (αHL) is often used to exchange small molecules between the inside and 
outside of synthetic cells 57–61. The αHL pore expresses robustly in cell-free systems, inserting into the 
liposome and spanning the whole membrane 63,64. This enables presenting internally expressed peptide 
tags on the surface of synthetic cells.  
 
Modified αHL expressed inside synthetic cells facilitates fusion  
We inserted a 6x-His tag into a trans-membrane loop of αHL, before Asp129 (DNA sequences are in 
Table S7), a location consistent with recently reported functionalization of αHL to display other tags.62  
To test liposome fusion with His-αHL, we prepared two populations of synthetic cells: population 1 
contained T7 RNA polymerase (T7RNAP) and αHL plasmid, and population 2 contained GFP plasmid and 
Ni-NTA lipid tags. Both populations also contained cell-free translation. αHL expression results in His tag 
presented on the surface of population 1, and the Ni-NTA lipid tag from population 2 binds to this His 
tag, initiating fusion. Upon liposome fusion, T7RNAP from population 1 facilitates expression of GFP 
plasmid from population 2. Lumen mixing can be monitored via GFP expression, and membrane growth 
can be monitored via membrane FRET dye signal (Figure 2a).  
After mixing equal amounts of population 1 (T7RNAP, αHL) with population 2 (GFP plasmid, Ni-NTA), we 
observed both GFP expression (Figure 2c) and increased FRET donor signal (Figure 2b), indicating 
membrane growth and lumen mixing. Fusion efficiency was dependent on both the amount of αHL and 
Ni-NTA. Increasing the concentrations of both resulted in increased fusion efficiency, up to 10nM αHL 
plasmid, and we observed decreased fusion efficiency above 1 mol% of Ni-NTA lipid (Figure 2b and c). 
The decrease in fusion efficiency at higher Ni-NTA concentrations can be explained by decreased 
liposome stability (Figure S1). We speculate that the decrease in fusion efficiency at higher αHL 
concentrations was due, in part, to an increase in leakage of the liposome contents through more 
membrane pores (Figure S3). 
 
Fusion efficiency depends on amount of αHL 
We investigated further improvement by mixing population 1 (T7RNAP, αHL) and population 2 (GFP 
plasmid, Ni-NTA) at different liposome ratios. The GFP expression increased with a higher amount of 
population 1, but not with higher amount of population 2 (Figure 2i), indicating that αHL liposomes 
carrying T7RNAP were the rate limiting reagent in the GFP production. This phenomenon was 
advantageous for the intended use of this fusion mechanism: in our synthetic cell cycle, cells make αHL 
while the Ni-NTA “feeder liposomes” will be used in excess. This might be compared to natural feeding: 
there is usually more prey (i.e., feeder liposomes) than predators (i.e., synthetic cells). 
We compared the time course of GFP expression at different αHL and Ni-NTA liposome ratios (Figure 
2d-f) to the time course of GFP production in a positive control fusion experiment facilitated by DNA 
tags (Figure 2h). The DNA tag system has been previously used to facilitate synthetic cell fusion34. At 
identical total liposome concentrations, the DNA tag-induced fusion had similar efficiency as the αHL – 
Ni-NTA fusion. The negative “no fusion” control were samples containing no Ni-NTA tags on population 
2, resulting in no measurable GFP expression (Figure 2g).  
To further characterize the fusion system, we quantified the DNA and mRNA post-fusion. We prepared 
population 1 containing T7RNAP and αHL at 3nM plasmid, and population 2 containing GFP plasmid and 
Ni-NTA at 0.6mol%. We performed fusion experiments mixing the two populations, using either 1x 
(1mM total lipid concentration) or 2x (2mM total lipid concentration) of each population. After fusion 
and incubation, we measured GFP fluorescence, and quantified amount of GFP mRNA and DNA. As 
expected, experiments with 2x of population 2 (carrying GFP plasmid) had twice as much GFP DNA as 
samples with 1x population 2 (Figure 2j). Transcription of GFP occurred in all samples that underwent 
fusion (Figure 2k), confirming the fluorescence data showing GFP expression in samples after fusion 
(Figure 2l). 
Liposome fusion is possible only if both 1) αHL is expressed in one population, and 2) Ni-NTA lipids are 
present on the other liposome population (Figure S5). We have visualized the liposomes after fusion, 
with lumen GFP expression and red membrane dye (Figure 2m). 
 
Summary 
Overall, our experiments demonstrate that His tagged αHL paired with Ni-NTA lipids induce liposome 
fusion, which leads to mixing of the lumen of synthetic cells. The fusion efficiency depends on the 
expression of His tagged αHL, and on the amount of Ni-NTA lipids in the membrane. Because the αHL is 
expressed inside synthetic cells, this is a fusion system that depends on protein encoded in the genome 
of the cells.  
For the cell cycle experiments described below, we used 3nM αHL plasmid in starting synthetic cell 
population, and 0.6mol% Ni-NTA in the membrane of feeder liposomes.  
 
Five generations of synthetic cell cycle 
Cell cycle, rounds of feeding and growth, is one of the hallmarks of life. We combined genetically 
encoded feeding and growth, DNA replication, and mechanical division, into a synthetic cell cycle.  
We built a synthetic minimal cell encapsulating a 90kbp genome, divided into eight plasmids (Table S6). 
The genome contained proteins needed for the translation system65, Phi29 DNA polymerase for genome 
replication, His tagged αHL membrane pore, T7RNAP gene for transcription, and GFP reporter gene.  
Gene expression was achieved through a PURE in vitro translation system modified to accommodate the 
Phi29 polymerase reaction20 (Methods section 2). We optimized the external solution, called the 
synthetic cell media, to increase yield of translation (Supplementary text section 4, “Synthetic cell 
culture media”). The presence of an external solution containing all necessary small molecules prevents 
leakage from αHL pores from diluting the synthetic cell contents.   
The feeder liposomes contain all the enzymes and small molecules needed for synthetic cell metabolism 
(RNA polymerase, Phi29, PURE system) but no DNA. The feeder liposome membranes are labeled with 
0.6mol% Ni-NTA lipids, to enable fusion with the His tagged αHL synthetic cells. Feeders provide 
replenishment for all the components of synthetic cell metabolism, and provide lipids for growth of the 
cell membrane. Cells were first divided using mechanical extrusion, to provide high division yields (with 
lower yield genetically encoded division presented later in this paper). 
 
Cell cycle results in replication of DNA, transcription and translation in daughter cells 
Each cell cycle starts with a 12-hour incubation of cells in the presence of feeder liposomes. After 12 
hours, synthetic cells are mechanically divided (via extrusion), and mixed with a fresh population of 
feeders, starting a new generation. Feeder liposomes at each generation carry a generation counter 
oligo. After three, four, and five generations, we measured: GFP fluorescence, mRNA abundance for GFP 
and αHL genes, abundance of newly synthesized DNA for each plasmid of the 90kbp genome, and the 
generation counter analysis (Figure 3). 
Newly synthesized DNA was detected in cells after each generation. To ensure that we only detect new 
DNA arising from Phi29 genome replication, samples were first digested with DpnI. We measured the 
amounts of all individual plasmids in the cell genome: GFP, αHL, pLD1, pLD2, pLD3, pREP and T7RNAP. 
New DNA was only detected in samples where Phi29 replicase was present (Figure 3a, e and i). 
In each generation cells also produced mRNA (Figure 3b, f, j) and GFP (Figure 3d, h, l; Supporting Text 
section 3).  
 
The same “lineage” of synthetic cells feeds in every generation 
We developed a generation counter to track feeding events and provide direct evidence that the same 
“parent” synthetic cell fused with at least one feeder liposome in each generation (Supplementary text 
section 2, “The generation counter”). A starting population of cells was created with all five-generation 
counter “top” strands, and each population of feeder liposomes contained one “bottom” strand for the 
appropriate generation. After each generation, we processed samples with a primer specific to the 
product of three, four, and five generations of the counter. For example, using the primer for three 
generations we detected generation counter in cells fed at generation 3, whereas no Gen3 product was 
detected in samples without feeding (Figure 3c). Similarly, analysis with the primer matching the 
product of four generations showed product in the fed samples after four and five generations, and no 
product after three generations or without feeding (Figure 3g). With the primer for the product of five 
generations (labeled Gen5 primer) we detected the expected product only in the samples with all five 
generations of feeding, and no product in earlier generations, or in samples without feeding (Figure 3k).  
 
All plasmids are inherited, and daughter cells are stable 
After five generations, we performed single cell quantification of all plasmids from the 90kbp genome. 
30% of all analyzed cells contained the complete genome - all seven plasmids (Figure 3o and 3p). 
Despite the lack of a cytoskeleton and a DNA segregation mechanism, a significant fraction of daughter 
cells underwent five cycles of growth and replication inheriting the complete multi-partite genome.  
We visualized the liposomes after five generations of growth and division, with samples after complete 
cell cycle (Figure 3m) and samples without genome replication and without feeding (Figure 3n).  
As a control, we removed feeder liposomes by dialysis after each generation, to ensure that previous 
feeders are not available in the next generation. The removal of feeders after each generation did not 
significantly affect the amount of DNA and mRNA after five generations (Figure S25).  
To confirm that liposomes remain stable, we measured content leakage after five generations. We 
detect no leakage of plasmid, mRNA or ribosomal RNA after five generations of growth and division, 
(Figure S35). The major components of the cell that are too big to pass through αHL channels remain 
inside the liposomes after five generations.  
 
Summary 
The generation counter measurements demonstrate that there are synthetic cells that fused with 
feeder liposome during all five rounds of feeding. The DNA quantification confirmed that new genetic 
material is synthesized during the cell cycle, and all plasmids of the 90kbp genome are replicated. A 
summary of trends in mRNA, DNA, and generation counter abundance is in Table S4.  
 
Selection 
Selection and competition are hallmarks of biological life. Darwinian evolution is possible in synthetic 
cells66, however without coupling of genotype to growth and number of offspring, the potential for 
natural selection would be limited. Having engineered a genetically encoded growth mechanism, we 
recognized the potential for demonstrating an example of selection process coupling genotype to 
phenotype through multiple cycles of growth and division. 
 
More αHL leads to more growth and more daughter cells after division 
In our system synthetic cell feeding depends on the amount of αHL in the membrane: more protein 
results in more fusion with feeder liposomes (Figure 2). To engineer selection through feeding and 
growth, we introduced a mutation increasing expression of αHL. The mutation was in the αHL gene 
promoter, using a stronger variant of T7 RNA promoter, called T7Max.67 This represents a mutation that 
is potentially beneficial to cells, if more αHL gene product results in more feeding, more growth, and in 
turn leads to more daughter cells after division. 
To explore whether a stronger promoter might cause more efficient fusion, we used a mixed 
populations of synthetic cells and observed GFP expression (indicating lumen mixing) and FRET 
(indicating membrane mixing) (Figure 2). In each experiment, one population of cells contained αHL 
plasmid, T7RNAP, and translation system, while the other population was labeled with Ni-NTA lipids and 
carried GFP plasmid plus translation system, but lacked T7RNAP. After mixing each cell type at equal 
ratios, we analyzed samples using flow cytometry. In samples with αHL under the control of regular T7 
promoter, 28% of liposomes showed GFP fluorescence (Figure 4a and c), while in samples with αHL 
under control of stronger T7Max, 45% of the liposomes were fluorescent (Figure 4b and c). Both GFP 
(indicating lumen mixing) and Cy5 signals (indicating membrane mixing) increased more in cells with αHL 
under T7Max promoter, indicating greater fusion efficiency (Figure 4d). To confirm the fluorescent data, 
we quantified the amount of DNA and mRNA for GFP and for αHL genes. The DNA concentration for 
both αHL and GFP was the same in all samples (Figure 4e and g). The αHL and GFP mRNA abundance 
was higher in samples with the stronger promoter (Figure 4f and h), which aligned with GFP 
fluorescence data, showing more mRNA in samples with αHL under T7Max and samples with higher 
fusion efficiency for stronger promoter.  
Overall, at the same DNA concentration, liposomes with αHL under stronger T7Max promoter exhibit 
higher fusion efficiency. Encouraged by this, we proceeded with selection experiments. 
In all selection experiments, two populations of synthetic cells were prepared separately, one 
encapsulating αHL under regular T7 promoter, and one with αHL under stronger T7Max promoter. All 
cells contained the 90kbp genome, PURE translation system and Phi29 genome replication system. 
Cells contained GFP plasmid in only one of the populations: either in T7 αHL population, or the T7Max 
αHL population. In each experiment, two populations were mixed: always one population with GFP was 
mixed with one population without GFP. After five generations of genome replication, growth and 
division, samples were analyzed using flow cytometry. In cells with the weaker T7 αHL promoter, the 
GFP liposomes constituted 34% of the total – down from the initial 50% at the start of the experiment 
(Figure 4i and k). In the reverse experiment, where GFP gene was in population with αHL under the 
stronger T7Max promoter, we found that 58% of liposomes contained GFP after five generations (Figure 
4l and k). After just five generations, cells with stronger T7Max αHL outcompete cells with weaker T7 
αHL. This demonstrates a case of selection in populations of synthetic cells: a beneficial mutation that 
enables more efficient feeding (the stronger T7Max promoter) results in more offspring.  
 
Metabolic load affects growth and division  
 We noted that the weaker cells lose more than the stronger cells gain. Since the experiments are 
analogous, the loss of weaker cells should match the gain of stronger cells. Yet cells with GFP in T7 αHL 
lost 18% of share in total population, while cells with GFP in the T7Max αHL gained only 9%. This could 
be explained by uneven metabolic loads. Synthetic cell metabolism is not very robust, so the added load 
of expressing GFP reporter might have burdened the cells enough to create a noticeable difference. 
When GFP was in T7 αHL cells (the weaker growers), the effect was cumulative: those cells were both 
handicapped by the weaker promoter, and burdened by GFP expression. In the reverse experiment, 
where GFP was in T7Max αHL cells, the stronger promoter still allowed those cells to gain in numbers, 
but slower than their unburdened counterparts in the previous experiment.  
To rule out that the difference in abundance is not caused by one of the plasmids being faster to 
amplify, we compared Phi29 replication yields for T7 and T7Max plasmids. There was no significant 
difference in replication yields (Figure S52), indicating that Phi29 does not favor one or the other 
plasmid, and thus does not affect the outcome of the selection experiments. 
Next, we directly tested whether the added metabolic load (expressing fluorescent reporter) affects 
fitness of the cells. We repeated the generation experiments, this time with both populations carrying a 
fluorescent protein marker. The marker was either GFP or mCherry; both proteins are of similar size. We 
started with an equal ratio of the GFP and mCherry populations, with either fluorescent protein paired 
with either T7 or T7Max αHL (see legend under Figure 4o). After normalizing the fluorescence data to 
the calibration curve (Methods section 18), we found that when both populations expressed a 
fluorescent protein marker, the difference in gain of T7Max (11%) and in loss of T7 (10%) was nearly 
identical. The observed coupling of metabolic load to fitness illustrates how relatively complex, 
population-level regulatory mechanisms can already be observed in synthetic cells. 
We used sequencing to confirm that at the end of the experiment one genome indeed increases in 
abundance over the other. We prepared samples with equal starting ratio of T7 to T7Max. To better 
mimic the situation when new mutation slowly emerges and rises in the population, we also prepared 
samples with 9-to-1 ratio of T7 (the “old genome”) to T7Max (the “new mutation”). After five 
generations of cell cycle, genomes were sequenced (Methods section 16). We performed SNP/INDEL 
detection analysis, with T7 as the “original” sequence and the T7Max as the “variant”. (Figure 4n) In 
samples without growth and division, the sequence abundance closely matched the starting ratios (1 to 
1 or 9 to 1, respectively). In samples with the five generations of complete cell cycle, the T7Max gene 
abundance increased. Cells that started at equal ratio, ended up with 61% of T7Max (Figure 4o). When 
T7Max started as only 10% of the original population, after five generations the “new mutation” of 
T7Max already constituted 38% of the population. This process is similar to the spread of beneficial 
mutation through selection in live cells.  
 
Competition for feeding resources 
Encouraged by the experiments showing that faster growing cells can gain a larger share of the 
population, we investigated if such advantage persists in a resource limited environment. In all 
experiments described above, the feeder liposomes were used in excess of cells. To mimic resource 
limiting conditions, we mixed two cell populations: fast growing cells with T7Max αHL and slower 
growing cells with T7 αHL, and we proceeded with cell cycle experiments using varying amount of feeder 
liposomes. (Figure 5a) We used 1x (the same amount of feeder liposomes as used in previous 
experiments, 2mM total lipid concentration), and progressively less feeder liposomes: 0.5x (1mM total 
lipid in feeder liposomes), 0.25x (0.5mM lipid) or 0.1x (0.2mM lipid). Each feeding conditions were 
applied to two sets of experiments. In one set, the T7Max αHL cells carried GFP and the T7 αHL cells 
carried mCherry (the genomes were otherwise identical). In the other set of experiments, the 
fluorescent marker proteins were reversed: the T7Max αHL cells carried mCherry and the T7 αHL cells 
carried GFP. The proportion of T7Max cells to T7 cells was 1-to-1 at the start of the experiment.  
After five generations, the flow cytometry quantified green cells in each sample. Under the 1x feeding 
conditions, T7Max αHL cells that carried GFP were 60% of the total population (from a starting point of 
50%), while when GFP was in the T7 αHL cells, the GFP cells were 41% of the total population. This result 
was consistent with the competition results shown earlier (Figure 4). In the resource limited feeding 
experiments, with 0.5x, 0.25x and 0.1x feeder liposomes, the faster growing T7Max cells gained 
progressively more advantage over slower growing T7 cells. In the most resource limited feeding 
experiment, with 0.1x feeder liposomes, 70% of total population was fast growing GFP cells, compared 
to only 29% slow growing GFP cells (Figure 5b, g, h, i, j). Under resource limited conditions, the fast-
growing cells gain progressively more advantage over the slow growing cells.  
We used qPCR to quantify the amount of new DNA. After DpnI digest (to remove the genome originally 
inserted into synthetic cells) we quantified new GFP, mCherry and pLD1 DNA. The pLD1 was used as a 
“housekeeping control,” because this plasmid was present in both fast and slow growing populations. As 
expected, the results matched the flow cytometry data. Each sample had more of the fluorescent 
reporter gene present in the T7MAX fast growing cells: when T7Max αHL cells carried GFP, we found 
more GFP gene (Figure 5c), when T7Max αHL cells carried mCherry, we found more mCherry gene 
(Figure 5d). The amount of pLD1 in all samples was similar under each feeding condition (Figure 5e).  
The total amount of new DNA in cells with less feeder liposomes was lower than in cells with access to 
more feeders. This indicates that the lower amount of feeder liposomes indeed created resource limited 
conditions, where no cells were able to grow as much as they would if food wasn’t scarce. This created 
true competition for resources, and the fast growers were the winners.  
Directly comparing the number of GFP cells, and the amount of new DNA, in fast growing T7Max cells vs 
slow growing T7 cells, shows that under all feeding conditions T7Max cells grow faster, with greater 
gains under the most resource limited 0.1x feeding conditions (Figure 5b-f). In this minimal non-
autonomous system, we already see the emergence of the maxim “the rich get richer during global 
crisis.” As feeder liposomes were scarcer, the fast growers managed to gain more advantage over the 
slow growers. 
 
Genetically encoded division 
Natural cells divide because of forces of the cytoskeleton. In synthetic cells, we do not yet have a 
functional cytoskeleton.40,42 Thus, to achieve division we relied on a physical membrane deformation 
mechanism. Specifically, protein crowding on the surface of liposomes can induce division of 
liposomes68,69. So inspired e utilized our ability to display peptide tags on the surface of synthetic cells 
to engineer a simple genetically-encoded division mechanism.  
 
Modified αHL can induce division  
Synthetic cells expressing His tag labeled αHL were incubated with Ni-NTA biotin linker, and streptavidin. 
The binding of Ni-NTA to His tag, and binding of biotin to streptavidin, enabled attachment of 
streptavidin to the surface of synthetic cells (Figure 6a). Based on protein crowding principles, we 
expected streptavidin to induce membrane curvature and division, much like was previously 
demonstrated with GFP 69.  
Initial experiments confirmed that synthetic cells with streptavidin attached to the surface are, on 
average, smaller than synthetic cells that did not have either αHL, streptavidin or Ni-NTA linker (Figure 
6b).  
Mindful of potential disadvantages of the size measurement using dynamic light scattering in 
heterogeneous populations like synthetic cells, we characterized division by more quantitative methods. 
We immobilized synthetic cells on magnetic beads using click chemistry (Methods section 20). If division 
occurs, the “parent” cells should remain attached to beads, and “daughter” cells can separate from the 
beads. (Figure 6e) After incubation with streptavidin and Ni-NTA linker, we collected the cells still 
attached to the beads (the “parent” fraction), and the cells separated from the beads (the “daughter” 
fraction).  
As expected, in all samples containing cells with αHL, we detected αHL DNA in the “parent” cells still 
attached to the beads (Figure 6g). In the “daughter” cell fraction, we only detected αHL DNA in the 
sample with all division elements present: αHL, streptavidin and Ni-NTA linker (Figure 6f). Only if the 
cells divide was a detectable amount of daughter cell genome found free off the beads, confirming 
division, demonstrating synthetic cell division induced by expression of a protein inside the cell. 
 
Stronger expression of αHL leads to more daughter cells 
Next, we took advantage of the slow (T7) and fast (T7Max) promoter system described earlier, to 
investigate competitive division. Two populations of synthetic cells were mixed and immobilized on 
beads: one contained αHL under the slow T7 promoter, the other population contained αHL under the 
fast T7Max promoter.  Since T7 and T7Max are difficult to differentiate directly by qPCR, we used a 
unique DNA marker to label the T7 and T7Max cells (Methods section 21). After division, all “parent” 
fractions, cells still attached to the beads, as expected contained either T7, T7Max, or both markers 
(Figure 6i). Off bead daughter containing markers for T7 and T7Max were observed only if division was 
enabled by the presence of streptavidin and linker (Figure 6h). In samples where both T7 and T7Max 
cells were present, the amount of T7 marker in daughter cells was lower than the amount of T7Max 
marker (1.8nM vs 3.3nM), indicating competitive division driven by genetic differences among 
synthetic cells -- the faster T7Max cells produced more daughter cells than the slower T7 cells. 
 
Genetically encoded growth and division can be combined  
To combine growth and division, we prepared synthetic cells encapsulating the entire 90kbp genome, 
and two αHL plasmids: the His tagged and the FLAG tagged αHL. Those cells were immobilized on 
magnetic beads and fed with Ni-NTA labeled feeder liposomes. After feeding, biotin FLAG antibody 
linker and streptavidin were added to induce division (Figure 6j). We tested all possible combinations of 
DNA replication (in the presence or absence of Phi29), growth (feeder liposomes with or without Ni-NTA 
lipids), and division (with or without biotin FLAG antibody). Both “daughter” free off beads and “parent” 
attached to beads cells were analyzed. In all “parent” samples we detected, as expected, a generation 
counter oligo in samples that were fed (Figure 6k). αHL DNA was detected in all “parent” samples 
(Figure 6m), while newly synthesized αHL DNA was detected only in samples with Phi29 (Figure 6l). In 
daughter cells, the generation counter oligo and DNA were detected only in samples that did undergo 
division – confirming that division is necessary to produce daughter cells. Generation counter was 
detected in daughter cells that had feeder liposomes and divided (Figure 6n), αHL DNA was found in all 
daughter cells that divided (Figure 6p), and newly synthesized αHL DNA was found, as expected, only in 
daughter cells with Phi29 and division (Figure 6o). The αHL quantification here does not distinguish 
between FLAG and His tagged variants – the data shows total αHL gene.  
We used qPCR to confirm that daughter cells inherited the multi-partite genome. Each of the plasmids 
comprising the 90kbp genome was detected in the daughter cell fraction that went through DNA 
replication, feeding and division (Figure 6r).  
This experiment demonstrated that synthetic minimal cells with 90kbp genome can undergo both 
genetically encoded growth and division.  
 
Complete synthetic cell cycle with selection 
The synthetic cell cycle shown here represents key steps towards the development of artificial life. We 
demonstrated that synthetic cells can undergo cycles of genetically encoded feeding, coupled with 
replication of genetic material, and followed by division into new daughter cells. We engineered a 
genetically encoded mechanism for the growth and division of synthetic cells, and we demonstrated 
that this genetically encoded growth mechanism can be used to spread a beneficial mutation through 
the population, resulting in selection. We demonstrated how in a resource limited environment the 
advantages of the faster growing population increase, as food availability decreases, illustrating 
competition for resources. We demonstrated a genetically encoded mechanism for the division of 
synthetic cells that does not require cytoskeleton. We have combined the feeding and division, 
demonstrating that synthetic cells can grow and divide via genetically encoded mechanisms.  
All living cells require external intervention to support life. For example, if a cell culture plate does not 
get passaged into fresh media, the cells die. Similarly for synthetic cells, intervention might entail 
feeding (via feeder liposomes) and providing streptavidin necessary for division. This work presents the 
first example of a cell cycle, selection and competition, and reproduction, in minimal synthetic cells 
created from non-living building blocks. The identity and concentration of each building block is known, 
and can be controlled. This brings us closer to defining the possible minimal chemical composition of 
life. A minimal cell displaying key hallmarks of life, like cell cycle and reproduction, also enables building 
an accurate computational model of life, improving on already advanced minimal non-living cell 
models.70 Our cell is not as capable or complex as living minimal cells, while the function of all its 
essential genes are fully defined. 
The selection demonstrated here is directly coupled with feeding and growth, like in the case of 
Darwinian evolution in nature. Cells that carry the mutation enabling more efficient growth (stronger 
promoter for αHL) produce more daughter cells. Over several generations of cell cycle, the population 
distribution changes, with increased amount of the cells carrying the advantageous mutation. This 
contrasts with artificial selection methods demonstrated in vitro before, where external selection 
procedure (like pull down column) was needed. Synthetic cells presented here undergo selection: the 
beneficial mutation results in more offspring. Since the beneficial mutation did not arise spontaneously 
in the population, but was instead introduced artificially, this is different from the natural Darwinian 
evolution. Next step towards more robust synthetic life will be to turn the selection we just 
demonstrated into a true Darwinian evolution, by enabling spontaneous rise of mutations. 
Mechanism presented in this work demonstrates genetically encoded division of synthetic cells, 
enabling future work in coupling growth, division and evolution. Further work is needed to develop 
more robust, higher yield and controllable division mechanisms71,72. This will likely eventually require the 
development of a synthetic cytoskeleton. However, our work demonstrates that simple genetically 
encoded replication is possible in the absence of cytoskeleton. Supplementary text section 9 provides 
more in-depth discussion on future directions for engineering replication and robust metabolism in 
synthetic cells.  
Overall, we have demonstrated key milestones towards construction of synthetic life: a complete cell 
cycle, including growth and division, and selection, in minimal cells with known identity of all 
components. This can serve as a chassis for further optimization of synthetic cells undergoing Darwinian 
evolution, advancing the field towards robust artificial life. 
 
Acknowledgments  
We thank Hannes Mutschler and Kai Libicher for advice on troubleshooting the pREP reactions and for 
the gift of the pREP plasmid. We thank Vincent Noireaux for advice on T7 RNAP expression and for the 
generous gift of αHL and T7 RNA polymerase plasmids. We thank Anthony Forster for the gift of the pLD 
plasmids. We thank Drew Endy for helpful comments and feedback on framing of this work.  
Figures were created with elements from BioRender.com. This work was supported by John Templeton 
Foundation award 61184, the generous gifts from Jeremy Wertheimer, Alfred P. Sloan Foundation 
awards G-2022-19420 and G-2024-22710, and NSF Awards 2338121 and 2419641.  
Figure 1: Cell cycle of synthetic cells with 90kbp genome, undergoing 
selection and replication 
 
 
 

Figure 1. Cell cycle of synthetic cells with 90kbp genome, undergoing selection replication. The cells 
are assembled from individually purified natural components.  
a: Fluorescent microscopy of synthetic cell undergoing division. The cytoplasm of synthetic cell is 
expressing GFP. Scale bar is 10µm. Additional imaging is on Figure 6. 
b: The synthetic cells contain a multipartite DNA genome (A). The cell cycle comprises genome 
replication (B), protein expression (C), coupling translation of the membrane protein αHL (D) with 
nutrient uptake (E), waste removal (F), and genetically encoded feeding and growth (G).  
The feeding causes growth of the cell membrane (utilizing lipids from feeder liposomes) and 
replenishment of the cellular machinery (from the lumen of feeder liposomes). The feeding is possible 
through interaction of αHL expressed inside synthetic cells with the tag on the incoming feeder 
liposome. Thus, we demonstrate coupling of protein expression (αHL expression, which enables feeding) 
with growth of synthetic cells. The schematic insert on this figure illustrates the beginning of the fusion 
of the two membranes: synthetic cell membrane with feeder liposome membrane, as a result of Ni-NTA 
lipid tag interaction with αHL protein.  
Feeding and growth resulting from expression of protein inside the cell also enables competition 
between stronger and weaker feeders, and stronger feeders produce more offspring, enabling selection 
(H).  
The last step of the cell cycle is division of the compartment, either mechanical or genetically encoded 
division(I).  
We also developed a generation counter, to monitor rounds of feeding and division (J).  
The microscopy images on this figure show synthetic cell after 5 generations of growth and mechanical 
division using brightfield, GFP to visualize lumen and red dye for membrane (top right panel), and red 
membrane dye to visualize genetically encoded division (bottom left panel). The scale bar is 5µm. 
 
  
Figure 2: Genetically encoded feeding and growth of synthetic cells 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Genetically encoded feeding and growth of synthetic cells. 
a: Two populations of synthetic cells are mixed. Population 1 contains T7 RNA polymerase and TxTl 
machinery expressing αHL. Population 2 contains the plasmid encoding GFP under the control of a T7 
promoter and Ni-NTA lipids in the membrane. The His tag on the αHL (in population 1) binds to the Ni-

NTA lipids (in population 2), inducing membrane fusion. After lumens mixed, the T7 RNA polymerase 
from population 1 enables transcription and expression of GFP from a plasmid in population 2.  
Different ratio of αHL plasmid and NTA tag: 
b and c: The fusion efficiency depends on both the amount of the αHL plasmid in population 1, and the 
concentration of the Ni-NTA lipids in population 2. Fusion efficiency is measured as membrane mixing 
represented by FRET intensity between Cy5 and Cy7 (b, more Cy5 fluorescence correlates with more 
fusion), and lumen mixing represented by GFP expression (c, more GFP fluorescence correlates with 
more fusion). Individual data points and statistical analysis for GFP fluorescence is on Figure S6, for Cy5 
FRET fluorescence on Figure S7. After fusion, selected samples were purified on a size exclusion column 
to measure content leakage, data on Figure S3. A calibration curve for all FRET membrane mixing 
measurements is on Figure S76. Data for the stability of the liposomes with membranes containing a 
different percent of Ni-NTA lipids are on Figure S8 and the data for the stability of liposomes with an 
increasing amount of αHL are on Figure S9.  
Different ratio of cells: 
d - h: Example of individual time courses of GFP expression in fusion experiments. d - f: The amount of 
either population 1 containing αHL or population 2 containing GFP plasmid was varied. 1x is 1mM total 
lipid concentration and 2x is 2mM total lipid concentration. g: “No fusion” conditions indicate a lack of 
Ni-NTA lipids on population 2. h: The positive control uses DNA fusion tags instead of the αHL and Ni-
NTA pair. Shaded area indicates SEM, n=3 independently prepared and processed liposome samples. 
The Y axis on panels in this section (except negative control g) is the same, to allow for quick visual 
comparison of the data. 
i: Fusion induced GFP expression depends on the ratio of population 1 containing αHL vs. population 2 
containing GFP. All values are averaged with n=3 independently prepared and processed liposome 
samples. Individual GFP fluorescence data points and statistical analysis are on Figure S12. 
j and k: RT qPCR and qPCR measurements of the GFP gene, l: GFP fluorescence from the same fusion 
samples as j and k with all measurements taken after a 12-hour incubation. The graphical legend below 
panels j, k, and l marks the ratio of population 1 (αHL, T7 RNAP) to population 2 (GFP plasmid, Ni-NTA) 
and the presence or absence of a fusion event (absence of fusion means the absence of Ni-NTA lipids in 
population 2). Box and whiskers data points on panels j and k are prepared with n=3 independently 
prepared and processed liposome samples. Individual data points and statistical analysis are on Figure 
S13. Dots on top of bars on panel L indicate all individual data points, the bars are the average value.  
m: Two examples of microscopy images of liposomes after fusion. The green channel shows GFP 
expression, the red channel shows Rhodamine membrane dye, and the third panel in each grouping is 
composite of the red and green channel. The liposomes are from experiments under the same fusion 
conditions as data on panel d, with images collected after 12h of incubation.  
All protein expression data on this figure were collected using whole cell lysate (TxTl).  
 
  
Figure 3: Five generations of cell cycle with 90kbp genome 
 

Figure 3. Five generations of cell cycle with 90kbp genome.  
Synthetic cells were undergoing five generations of cell cycle, and the samples were analyzed after 
three, four, and five generations. The data shown on this figure represents experiments with mechanical 
division after each generation. All experiments were performed in four separate variants: the complete 
cell cycle with Phi29 genome replication and with feeder liposomes (symbol ); without Phi29 genome 
replication, but with feeding (symbol ); with Phi29 for genome replication, but without feeding 
(symbol ); and without either Phi29 genome replication or feeding (symbol ).  
a, e and i: qPCR quantification of new DNA, one gene from each plasmid, indicating Phi29 genome 
replication. The samples were treated with DpnI, removing the original plasmid DNA, so only newly 
synthesized DNA was detectable. All individual genes on every plasmid of the genome were similarly 
quantified after generation 5, data on Figure S28. 
b, f and j: RT qPCR quantification of the mRNA abundance.  
d, h and l: GFP fluorescence measured for all samples at the end of the cell cycle for the indicated 
generation. Dots on top of the bars indicate all the individual data points, the bars are the average value. 
Flow cytometry analysis of GFP samples is on Figure S30. 
c, g and k: quantification of the generation counter, detecting the counter product of the indicated 
number of generations. The samples were processed with either the primer for generation three 
(labeled gen3, detecting three, four, or five generations), the primer for generation four (labeled gen4, 
detecting three or four generations), or the primer for generation five (labeled gen5, detecting only the 
results of five generations). 
m and n: Fluorescence microscopy of synthetic cell samples, imaged after five generations. m: complete 
cell cycle, including both Phi29 genome replication and feeder liposomes, n: no genome replication and 
no feeding. Scale bar is 20µm. The green channel is GFP fluorescence, and the red channel is rhodamine 
membrane dye. More images are on Figure S31. The feeder vesicles are not visible on microscopy 
images because of lack of membrane or lumen fluorescent label.  
o and p: Abundance of each plasmid after 5 generations of cell cycle with growth and replication 
(symbol ) measured in individual cells. Data from single cell amplification and qPCR analysis of 
abundance of each of the individual plasmids (see Table S6 for the list of plasmids) in a synthetic cell 
genome. o: Number of cells containing given number of plasmids from the 7-plasmid genome. p: 
Percent of single cell samples containing each plasmid. Individual data points for each plasmid are on 
Figure S32. 
On all panels, the graphs represent 3 independently prepared and processed liposome samples, 
individual data points are on Figure S34. Statistical significance analysis showing P values for data 
demonstrated on this figure is in Table S9. Cell leakage analysis after 5 generations is on Figure S35.  
The cartoon cells are a visual guide only, not an accurate description of content of each cell (each cell 
contains multi-plasmid genome, multiple copies of ribosomes, polymerases, and generation counters).  
All Y axes on qPCR panels are in nM. The panels indicating the same measurement for three different 
generations (for example new GFP DNA on panels a, e, and i) have the same Y axis scale, to enable direct 
comparison.  
All protein expression data on this figure were collected using PURE system.   

Figure 4: Selection in populations of synthetic cells 

Figure 4. Selection in populations of synthetic cells  
a - h: Fusion efficiency controlled by strength of αHL expression. Fusion between two populations of 
synthetic cells, according to the same setup as shown on Figure 2, with lumen fusion indicated by GFP 
expression and membrane fusion indicated by Cy5 signal.  
a - c: Flow cytometry analysis of samples prepared with either T7 αHL (panel a) or T7Max αHL (panel b), 
after fusion incubation. Full flow cytometry data are on Figure S49. c: summary of the flow cytometry 
results, showing percentage of liposomes expressing GFP in samples with “weaker” T7 αHL and with 
“stronger” T7Max αHL.  
All plasmids other than αHL were under the T7 promoter, the T7Max was only used in αHL plasmid. 
“T7Max cells” indicate cells with αHL under T7Max, with all other plasmids in that cell under regular T7.  
d - h: characterization of liposome fusion with T7 αHL, T7Max αHL, and negative control without αHL. d: 
GFP signal (green bars) indicating lumen mixing, and % membrane mixing (gray bars), measured after 
12h incubation. e and g: abundance of plasmid DNA (E for αHL plasmid and G for GFP plasmid) in the 
same fusion experiments as shown on panel d. f and h: abundance of mRNA (F for αHL gene and H for 
GFP gene) in the same fusion experiments as shown on panel d. 
i - o: Selection over 5 generations of cell cycle. All samples were prepared as described in the cell cycle 
experiments shown on Figure 3.  
I - m: Flow cytometry analysis after 5 generations of cell cycle with two competing populations in each 
sample. Four types of samples were prepared: cells with T7 αHL plasmid (symbol ), cells with T7 αHL 
plasmid and GFP plasmid (symbol ), cells with T7Max αHL plasmid (symbol ), and cells with T7Max 
αHL plasmid and GFP plasmid (symbol ). Two types of cells were mixed, at equal ratio, for each 
experiment. In each case, T7 and T7Max cells were mixed, with one of the populations containing GFP 
reporter. After either 5 generations of complete cell cycle (symbol ), or incubation without DNA 
replication and without feeding and division (symbol ) samples were analyzed using flow cytometry. 
Experiments with GFP reporter in T7 αHL cells: after DNA replication and division on panel i, and without 
DNA replication and division on panel j. Experiments with GFP reporter in T7Max αHL cells: after DNA 
replication and division on panel l, and without DNA replication and division on panel m. Full flow 
cytometry data are on Figure S50. k: summary of the flow cytometry data, showing percentage of 
liposomes containing GFP in each of the 4 selection samples from panels i, j, l and m. 
n: Relative abundance of T7 and T7Max promoter sequences in samples after 5 rounds of complete cell 
cycle. Two types of synthetic cells were prepared for this experiment: cells with T7 αHL plasmid and cells 
with T7Max αHL plasmid. For each experiment, those two initial populations were mixed at ratio 
indicated in panel legend (equal 1 to 1 ratios, or samples where T7 population was 90% of the total 
abundance with the T7Max being 10%). All resulting samples had identical total lipid concentration, but 
different ratios of T7 to T7Max populations. After either 5 generations of full cell cycle (symbol ), or 
incubation without DNA replication and without feeding and division (symbol ) the abundance of T7 
and T7Max sequences was quantified via Illumina sequencing (Methods section 16, and Figure S53 and 
Figure S54).  
o: selection experiments with all cells carrying a fluorescent protein of similar size (normalized metabolic 
load). Experiments performed similarly to those on panels i-m, but this time both T7 and T7Max cells 
carried fluorescent protein (GFP or mCherry, as indicated in the legend under graph on panel o). After 5 

generations, fluorescence of both GFP and mCherry was measured, and normalized to calibration curves 
indicating what percent of each population contains this fluorescent protein (see Figure S55 for raw 
fluorescence data and Figure S56 for calibration curves, Table S10 for statistical analysis).  
The red bracket on panels k and o indicates the difference between the percent of population 
containing T7 and T7Max (all from starting 1 to 1 ratio). Experiments under similar set of conditions are 
indicated with yellow symbol:  samples with GFP in T7 αHL population, and  samples with GFP in 
T7Max αHL population. 
Data on all panels represent n=3 of independently prepared and processed liposome samples. Dots on 
top of bars indicate individual data points, the bars are the average value.  
Statistical analysis of data presented on this figure is in Table S10. 
All protein expression data on this figure were collected using PURE system.  
 
  

Figure 5: Competition for resources over multiple generations 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Competition for resources over multiple generations 
a: Two populations of synthetic cells, with αHL under T7 (weak) or T7Max (strong) promoter, go through 
5 cycles of growth and division. The strong growing cells (T7Max) fuse with more feeder liposomes than 
the weak growers (T7), resulting in more offspring carrying the strong (T7Max) gene after each round of 
division.  If the amount of feeder liposomes is restricted, the cells compete for the limited feeding 
resource and strong growers win.  
b – f: Two populations of synthetic cells were mixed in each competition experiment. One population 
expressed green marker (GFP) and the other population expressed red marker (mCherry). Each 
                                  
 
    
 
  
 
  
     
 
              
           
                
   
     
      
     
            
             
            
         
               
         
               
            
       
         
              
0
 0
60
                                      
0
 
6
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
                                                                        
                     
0
 0
100
 
              
           
       
     
                                        
0
6
12
                                        
0
6
12
experiment was performed in two variants: either mCherry was in the T7Max αHL population (symbol 
) and GFP was in the T7 αHL population (symbol ), or the reverse with the GFP in the T7Max αHL 
population (symbol ) and mCherry in the T7 αHL population (symbol ). Both variants of each 
experiment had five generations of growth and feeding, with varying amount of feeder liposomes. The 
1x feeder liposomes means the same conditions as cell cycle experiments on figure 3. The 0.5x, 0.25x 
and 0.1x feeder liposomes refer to proportionally less feeder liposomes than in the original 1x 
conditions. After 5 generations of growth and division, samples were analyzed by flow cytometry and 
qPCR. Changes in plasmid concentration over each generation were also quantified, Figure S58. 
Summary of changes between feeding regimes is on Figure S57. 
b: Flow cytometry analysis, quantifying what percentage of the total population are cells with the GFP 
marker. Full flow cytometry traces are on Figure S61. 
c – e: qPCR quantifying amount of newly synthesized DNA. c: GFP gene, d: mCherry gene, e: pLD1 gene 
(control “housekeeping” plasmid, identical in both T7 and T7Max populations).  
f: Relative fluorescence of mCherry and GFP, after 5 generations of growth and division. Absolute 
fluorescence values, individual data points and statistical analysis are on Figure S62. 
g – j: Example flow cytometry traces for individual experiments. G: mCherry in the T7Max αHL 
population, 1x feeder liposomes, h: GFP in the T7Max αHL population, 1x feeder liposomes, i: mCherry 
in the T7Max αHL population, 0.1x feeder liposomes, j: GFP in the T7Max αHL population, 0.1x feeder 
liposomes.  
k: Microscopy images showing cells under conditions of 1x feeding, with GFP in the T7Max αHL 
population (symbol ) and mCherry in the T7 αHL population (symbol ). Scale bar is 10µm. The feeder 
vesicles are not visible on microscopy images because they lack membrane or lumen fluorescent label. 
Data on all panels represent n=3 of independently prepared and processed liposome samples. Dots on 
top of bars indicate individual data points, the bars are the average value.  Statistical analysis for data on 
panels b – f is in Table S11. All protein expression data on this figure were collected using PURE system 
(Methods section 2).  
 
  
Figure 6: Genetically encoded replication of synthetic cells 
 

Figure 6. Genetically encoded replication of synthetic cells.  
Genetically encoded synthetic cell division 
a: synthetic cells express tagged membrane protein αHL; streptavidin and linker are added on the 
outside of the cells, binding to the αHL tag on the surface of the cells. The streptavidin induces curvature 
in the membrane, leading to cell division. Two systems were tested: αHL His tagged with Ni-NTA linker 
to bind streptavidin, and αHL FLAG tagged with biotin conjugated FLAG antibody to bind streptavidin. 
b: Synthetic cell size after division with the His tag system, under conditions excluding one of the 
essential division components (αHL, streptavidin, or the Ni-NTA linker), and with all division elements 
present. Individual data points are in Figure S64. c: Synthetic cell size after division, using FLAG tag 
system, under conditions excluding one of the essential division components (αHL, streptavidin, or the 
biotin FLAG antibody linker), and with all division elements present. Individual data points are in Figure 
S65. Flow cytometry data for division experiments are on Figure S63.  
e-i: Division of immobilized cells, and competition between two populations of cells. e: Synthetic cells 
are immobilized on magnetic beads. Streptavidin and Ni-NTA linker are added to the outside of the cells, 
as described on panel a. If division occurs, the daughter cells are free to separate from the beads. After 
the experiment, free synthetic cells are collected separately from the synthetic cells that remained on 
the beads.  
f and g: quantification of αHL DNA in synthetic cells freed from the beads (the “daughter cells”, panel f) 
and cells that remained attached to the beads (the “parent” cells, panel g), in experiments excluding one 
of the essential division components (αHL, streptavidin or the Ni-NTA linker), and with all division 
elements present. Individual data points are in Figure S66.  
h and i: Competitive division. Synthetic cells containing αHL under “slow” promoter T7 and αHL under 
“fast” promoter T7Max are dividing in the same reaction. Samples were analyzed for the presence of 
unique DNA marker (different for T7 and T7Max cells). Label “division” indicates either presence of 
streptavidin and Ni-NTA linker (division label “yes”), or absence of both streptavidin and linker (labeled 
“no” division). In each experiment, the sample contained either a mix of both synthetic cells containing 
T7 and T7Max αHL in equal amounts, or only one of the populations (only T7 or only T7Max). After 
incubation and division, unique DNA marker was quantified, identifying T7 and T7Max populations in 
“daughter” cells free off the beads (panel h) and in cells that remained attached to beads (panel i). 
Individual data points and statistical analysis are in Figure S67. 
Genetically encoded growth and division 
j: Synthetic cells were immobilized on beads. The cells expressed two types of αHL: His tag labeled, and 
FLAG tag labeled. The synthetic cells contained entire 90kbp genome (as shown on Figure 3), and 
growth was induced by addition of feeding liposomes with single generation counter marker. Following 
growth, division was induced by attaching streptavidin to the surface of synthetic cells via biotin 
conjugated FLAG antibody. After division, the “daughter” cells separated from the beads and the 
“parent” cells still attached to beads were collected and analyzed separately. Experiments were 
performed under conditions with or without DNA replication (i.e., +/- Phi29), with or without growth 
(feeder liposomes +/- Ni-NTA fusion tag), and with or without division (+/- biotin FLAG antibody).  
k and n: Generation counter oligo detection, indicating lumen fusion with feeder liposomes, measured 
in cells that remained attached to beads (panel k) and in cells free off the beads (panel n).  
l and o: quantification of newly synthesized αHL DNA, in cells attached to beads (panel l) and in cells free 
off the beads (panel o).  
m and p: measurement of total αHL DNA (not just newly synthesized), in cells attached to beads (panel 
m) and in cells free off the beads (panel p).  
r: qPCR detection of each plasmid from the synthetic cell genome in the “daughter” cell fraction free off 
the beads, in samples that did undergo feeding and division and DNA replication via Phi29.  
Individual data points for panels k-p are in Figure S68, statistical analysis is in Table S12, and individual 
data points for panel r on Figure S69.  
s: Fluorescent microscopy of synthetic cells after a cycle of genetically encoded growth and division. 
Scale bar is 2µm. Additional imaging is on Figure S73. 
All protein expression data on this figure were collected using PURE system (Methods section 2).  
 
  
Materials and methods 
 
Sequences of primers used in this work are listed in Table S2. Sequences of synthetic cell genome 
plasmids are in Table S7.  
Wavelengths used in fluorescent measurements in this work are listed in Table S5.  
 
For quick reference and finding the methods corresponding to each part of the project, below is a list of 
methods sections relevant to each main figure of this paper: 
Figure 2: methods sections 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 14, 15, 25, 26, 27 
Figure 3: methods sections 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 23, 24, 26, 27 
Figure 4: methods sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 12, 14, 15, 17, 18, 26, 27 
Figure 5: methods sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 12, 14, 15, 17, 18, 26, 27 
Figure 6: methods sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 11, 12, 14, 15, 19, 20, 21, 22, 26, 27 
 
Translation systems:  
Most of this work was done in PURE, with some preliminary experiments in whole cell extract TxTl. 
The only part of this work done with whole cell lysate TxTl was data on figure 2, described in the main 
paper section “Genetically encoded liposome fusion leads to growth”, accompanied by the experiments 
described in SI text sections 1 and 3 and accompanying SI figures.  
PURE translation system was used for all other results, shown on main figures 3, 4, 5 and 6 and all 
corresponding SI figures and SI text sections. All results described in main paper sections “Five 
generations of synthetic cell cycle”, “Selection”, “Competition for feeding resources”, and “Genetically 
encoded division” are obtained with PURE.  
 
 
Methods table of content  
1. General conditions and replicates 
2. pREP Reaction 
3. Plasmids and cloning 
4. Synthetic cell liposome preparation 
5. Fluorescent labeling of liposomes 
6. Feeder liposomes 
7. Fusion experiments 
8. VAMP2 peptide 
9. FRET 
10. Whole-cell extract TxTl  
11. Cell cycle with feeder liposome growth and mechanical division  
12. Generation counter 
13. Synthetic cell media optimization 
14. qPCR 
15. RT-qPCR 
16. Next Generation Sequencing 
17. Flow cytometry 
18. Selection and competition  
19. Dynamic Light Scattering 
20. Immobilization of synthetic cell liposomes on beads 
21. Genetically encoded division of synthetic cells 
22. Genetically encoded growth and division 
23. Single cell plasmid abundance 
24. Dialysis of feeder liposomes 
25. Western blot 
26. Summary of statistical analysis 
27. Size exclusion purification 
 
 
1. General conditions and replicates  
All experiments shown in this paper were done in triplicate. For liposome experiments, each replicate 
was prepared from a separate thin film of lipids, through separate liposome formation and separate 
incubation. All replicates for fluorescence, qPCR, RT-qPCR, sequencing, cytometry, DLS and gel analysis 
were prepared from independently performed experiments, and in case of a liposome sample 
undergoing this analysis the replicate was independently prepared starting from separate thin film. 
Unless otherwise indicated, synthetic cell reactions were incubated at 30°C.  
Unless otherwise stated, liposome experiments were performed in PCR tubes with gentle shaking.  
All experiments were performed under RNAse free regime, with RNAse free equipment.  
 
2. pREP Reaction 
Most of the protein expression experiments in this project were done with pREP transcription-
translation reaction: all experiments with Phi29 genome replication, cell cycle, feeding and growth, were 
done with pREP.20 
All plasmids used for pREP reactions were obtained via mini-prep (Epoch 2160250) followed by a second 
clean up via an PCR clean up kit (Epoch 2360250), then concentrated via lyophilization (see methods 
section 3 for plasmid preparation information). 
This protocol was adapted from a previous publication20. The 10x energy mix is stored at -80°C and 
composed of the following: 700mM potassium Glutamate, 79mM Magnesium Glutamate, 1M HEPES pH 
8.0, 250mM Creatine Phosphate (Sigma-Aldrich 27920-5G), 3.75mM Spermidine (Sigma-Aldrich S2526-
5G), 5.18g/L E. coli tRNAs (Sigma-Aldrich 10109550001), 60mM DTT (Goldbio DTT50). Additionally, it 
contained 3.6mM of each L-amino acid: Alanine, Arginine, Asparagine, Aspartic acid, Cysteine, Glutamic 
acid, Glutamine, Glycine, Histidine, Isoleucine, Leucine, Lysine, Methionine, Phenylalanine, Proline, 
Serine, Threonine, Tryptophan, Tyrosine and Valine. 
The 50x rNTP mix is premixed, stored at -80°C and composed of the following: 18.75mM ATP (Larova 
ATP_1000G), 12.5mM GTP (Larova GTP_1000G), 6.25mM CTP (Larova CTP_1000G), 6.25mM UTP (Larova 
UTP_1000G). 
The following reagents were combined at the following final concentrations: 1x Energy Mix from above, 
1x rNTP mix from above, 0.1x PURExpress Solution A (NEB E6800L), 60% of total volume PURExpress 
Solution B (NEB E6800L), 0.6mM dATP, 0.6mM dGTP, 0.6mM dCTP, 0.6mM dTTP (Denville Scientific 
CB4420-2), 4mM DTT (Goldbio DTT50), 0.4U/μl  NxGen Phi29 (Lucigen 30221-2), and plasmids. 
For most experiments, unless otherwise indicated, reactions were incubated at 30°C for 8 hours. 
 
3. Plasmids and cloning 
Sources of plasmids not cloned in our lab are indicated in the text. We thank Dr. Anthony Forster for a 
generous gift of pLD1, pLD2 and pLD3 plasmids.65 We thank Dr. Vincent Noireaux for generous gift of 
αHL and T7 RNA polymerase plasmids.  
All plasmids under T7Max promoter were cloned into a vector we have previously prepared67. This 
vector contains UTR1 and T500 terminator sequences optimized for bacterial in vitro translation.73 
All cloning was done using either Gibson assembly (using NEB enzyme kit E2611), or site directed 
mutagenesis (using NEB Q5 polymerase M0493 and NEB KLD enzyme mix M0554) 
In a typical translation experiment, each DNA plasmid was at 10nM final concentration. Unless 
otherwise stated, when more then one plasmid was used, each was introduced at the same 
concentration, except in experiments with the whole 90kb genome, where each plasmid was at 2.5nM 
concentration.  
All plasmids were amplified in DH5alpha E. coli cells. Plasmids were purified using GenCatch™ Plasmid 
DNA Mini-Prep Kit (Epoch, 2160250), followed by GenCatch™ PCR Cleanup Kit (Epoch, 2360250) for 
further purification. This was done based on oral reports from several colleagues who observed higher 
yields from in vitro translation reactions when using plasmids that were double-purified.   
The pREP reactions do not have large amount of “water” volume left after addition of all reagents. To 
address that problem, if more than 3 plasmids were used, the plasmid stock solutions were mixed, 
lyophilized, and resuspended in small volume of water (usually 3μl for a 30μl final volume reaction).  
 
4. Synthetic cell liposome preparation 
Unless otherwise specified, each synthetic cell liposome sample used in the experiments contained 
1mM total lipids (this is called “1x” liposomes in all mixing experiments). Liposomes were prepared with 
DOPE (1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine, Avanti 850725P), DOPC (1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-
3-phosphocholine, Avanti 850375P) and cholesterol (Avanti, 700100P) at a 1:3:1 molar ratio. Cholesterol 
was not included in the “total lipid” calculation, so each 1mM liposome sample contained 0.2 mM 
DOPE, 0.75mM DOPC and 0.25mM cholesterol.  
Liposomes were prepared according to the oil extrusion protocol described earlier35,74. Stock solutions of 
all lipids in chloroform were prepared at 1mg/ml of each lipid or cholesterol. Those stock solutions were 
mixed in amber glass vials to create thin film aliquots for each liposome sample. In a typical experiment, 
to create 30μl liposomes at 1mM lipid, a thin film aliquot was prepared by mixing 5.58μl DOPE stock, 
17.7μl DOPC stock and 2.9μl cholesterol stock. All chloroform stocks were transferred using glass 
syringes. Chloroform was removed from each vial by drying under gentle flow of nitrogen gas for 6h. 
Each vial was capped and stored in -20°C until use.  
To prepare liposomes, the thin film was suspended in 200μl mineral oil and incubated at 60°C with 
vigorous shaking for 3 hours, followed by 10 minutes of sonication in a bath sonicator and overnight 
incubation with vigorous shaking (on a vortexer with continuous shaking attachment) at room 
temperature. Then, the mineral oil samples were cooled to 4°C while shaking (on a vortexer in a 4°C cold 
room).  
For each sample, 30μL of internal liposome solution was added to the mineral oil lipid suspension and 
vortexed for 5 minutes at 4°C. That solution was next carefully layered on top of 2 0μL of centrifuge 
buffer (100mM HEPES, 200mM glucose, pH 8). Samples were carefully transferred to a chilled centrifuge 
and centrifuged at 18,000rcf at 4°C for 15 minutes. Next, the oil layer was very carefully removed using a 
gel loading pipette tip (a regular pipette tip would work too, but we preferred gel loading capillary tips 
for better precision).  
Next, with a fresh pipette tip, the liposomes were carefully removed from the bottom of the centrifuge 
tube and transferred to 250μL of pre-chilled wash buffer (100mM HEPES, 250mM glucose, pH 8). 
Samples were centrifuged at 12,000rcf at 4°C for 5 minutes. After that centrifugation step, any residual 
mineral oil visible on top of the wash buffer was removed, the liposomes were transferred to a new 
tube with a fresh pipette tip, and resuspended in the final reaction external media buffer. All the 
liposome preparations steps were performed at 4°C (in the cold room).  
Liposome sizes: For all liposomes in this work, the starting size was guided by the extrusion during initial 
preparation. For synthetic cell cycle experiments, liposomes were extruded through 2μm membrane 
(methods section 11). Feeder liposomes were extruded through membrane with 0.4μm pores (methods 
section 6). For DLS liposomes were extruded through 0.8μm membrane (methods section 19). 
 
5. Fluorescent labeling of liposomes 
If liposomes were labeled with a fluorescent membrane dye, the dye stock solution in chloroform was 
added to the thin lipid film chloroform mix. Unless otherwise stated, fluorescent dyes were used at 
0.1mol% of total lipid (excluding chloroform), so a sample of 1mM liposomes contained 1μM dye. If two 
dyes were used in the same liposome population, each was at 0.1mol% (so total 0.2mol% dye).  
All dyes were used from stock chloroform solution of 100μg/ml, adding appropriate amount of stock to 
the chloroform mixture of lipids in the process of preparation of thin film (see methods section 4 above).  
The dyes used to label liposomes in this project, and the stock amounts used to prepare sample of 30μl 
of 1mM liposomes, were:  
NBD (NBD-PE, (N-(7-Nitrobenz-2-Oxa-1,3-Diazol-4-yl)-1,2-Dihexadecanoyl-sn-Glycero-3-
Phosphoethanolamine, Thermo Fisher N360), 2.86μl stock for each thin film; 
Rhodamine (Lissamine™ Rhodamine B 1,2-Dihexadecanoyl-sn-Glycero-3-Phosphoethanolamine, Thermo 
Fisher L1392), 4.0μl stock for each thin film; 
Cy5 (Cy5-PE, 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-(Cyanine 5), Avanti 810335C), 3.79μl 
stock for each thin film; 
Cy7 (Cy7-PE, 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-(Cyanine 7), Avanti 810337C, 3.98μl 
stock for each thin film. 
 
6. Feeder liposomes 
The feeder liposomes for the generations of growth and division experiments were prepared according 
to the liposome preparation protocol described above (Methods section 4). The feeder liposomes were 
made from the same lipids (DOPE, DOPC, cholesterol at 1:3:1 molar ratio) as all other liposomes in this 
work, with the addition of Ni-NTA lipids (1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-[(N-(5-amino-1-
carboxypentyl)iminodiacetic acid)succinyl] nickel salt, Avanti 790404P) at the molar percentage 
described in each experiment.  
The molar percent was calculated relative to total lipid (not including cholesterol). For example, in a 
2mM liposome sample with 0.6mol% Ni-NTA lipid contained 12μM Ni-NTA lipid. The Ni-NTA lipids were 
added to the initial thin film chloroform mixture, using 0.1mg/ml chloroform stock. For example, for 
30μl of 2mM liposome sample with 0.6mol% Ni-NTA lipid, 3.8μl of Ni-NTA chloroform stock was added 
to the thin film mixture in chloroform.  
Feeder liposomes, after liposome formation, were extruded through a membrane with 0.4μm pores, 
using Avanti mini-extruder (Avanti, 610023) and PC Membranes 0.4μm (Avanti, 610007), using 9 
passages in each extrusion. After extrusion, the liposomes were equilibrated for 10 minutes with gentle 
shaking on an orbital shaker at 4°C (in the cold room), before use in fusion experiments.  
For cell cycle experiments, each feeder liposome population contained 0.6mol% Ni-NTA lipid, 4nM of 
one of the “bottom” oligos for the generation counter (see methods section 12), and a complete 1x 
reaction mixture for pREP reaction (methods section 2). Unless otherwise stated,  0μl of 2mM of feeder 
liposomes were used for each generation.  
 
7. Fusion experiments 
For all the fusion experiments, liposomes were prepared as described above (methods sections 4 and 6). 
All fusion samples were prepared at 1mM total lipid concentration, unless otherwise stated in the 
description of the experiment.  
For samples with externally added fusion tags, the liposomes were decorated with fusion tags according 
to the previously described protocols75. See section below for Vamp-2 protein details. The samples were 
incubated with fusion tags for 30 minutes at room temperature, tumbling gently on an orbital shaker.  
For samples with αHL as the fusion tag, the synthetic cells were prepared as described above and 
incubated for three hours at 30°C with gentle shaking on an orbital shaker inside of an incubator.  
After the initial incubation with fusion tags, or incubation to express αHL, the liposomes were mixed at 
the indicated ratios. In most experiments, equal volumes of 1mM total lipid samples were mixed, unless 
indicated otherwise in the experimental description. The fusion samples were incubated for 12 hours at 
30°C with gentle shaking. After the incubation, samples were transferred to a 96-well plate and 
fluorescence was recorded. If RT PCR, qPCR, or Western Blot analysis was needed, the liposomes were 
lysed with 0.1% Triton-X 100 (Acros Organics, AC215682500). 
In a typical fusion experiment, the liposome samples were mixed with gentle pipetting and incubated for 
6h (unless otherwise indicated) at 30°C with gentle shaking (on a shaker inside incubator). The mixing 
experiments were done in PCR tubes. 
Unless otherwise stated, each liposome sample used in fusion experiment was at 1mM total lipid (or 
1mM + Ni-NTA and/or dye, if used).  
 
8. VAMP2 peptide 
The His tag labeled 6xHis-VAMP2 peptide was purchased through a custom synthesis order from 
GeneScript, prepared via solid phase peptide synthesis. The peptide sequence was the VAMP 
(synaptobrevin) trans-membrane domain of the E3-VAMP2 peptide used in liposome embedding 
experiments before, HHHHHHGRKYWWKNLKMMIILVICAIILIIIIVYFST.75  
The peptide was delivered as a lyophilized powder, which was resuspended in 50mM HEPES pH 8.0 to 
create a  0μM stock solution. The solution of peptide was aliquoted in  μL portions, to avoid repeated 
freeze-thaw cycles.  
Unless otherwise indicated, the VAMP peptide to lipid molar ratio was 1:500. For example, samples of 
1mM lipid contained 2μM VAMP peptide.  
To label liposomes, we used a previously described procedure 75: after preparation of liposomes, 
typically a  0μL samples of 1mM total lipid was mixed with 1.2μL of peptide stock. The samples were 
mixed by vigorous pipetting for a minimum of 1 minute. The VAMP labeling was done at 4°C (in the cold 
room), to avoid initiating translation reactions inside the liposomes.   
 
9. FRET  
Membrane growth was measured using FRET experiments. Two different FRET pairs were used: either 
NBD-Rhodamine, or Cy5-Cy7. Generally, NBD-rhodamine was used when there was no GFP signal 
measured in the same samples, and Cy5-Cy7 was used when GFP (spectrally overlapping with NBD) was 
produced in the samples. 
The labeling of liposomes with fluorescent dye is described in methods section 5.  
Membrane growth experiments were monitored by tracking wavelength of the donor dye in each FRET 
pair, which was NBD and Cy5 for the pairs used in this project. See Figure S14 for the general scheme of 
FRET membrane growth experiment. One population of liposomes was labeled with both FRET dyes, the 
other population did not carry membrane dyes. Upon fusion and membrane growth, FRET dyes were 
diluted in the membrane, decreasing FRET effect and increasing measurable donor fluorescence.  
FRET signal was calibrated to % lipid mixing by preparing control samples of liposomes with decreasing 
amounts of FRET dyes corresponding to dilution upon membrane mixing. Sample representing 0% 
membrane mixing was 1mM liposomes with 0.1mol% of each of the FRET dyes (so total 0.2mol% FRET 
dyes). Sample representing 50% lipid mixing was 1mM liposomes with 0.05mol% each dye, etc.  
All control liposomes were prepared from thin lipid films prepared as described above (see sections 4 
and 5), then samples were extruded through 0.4μm pores, using Avanti mini-extruder (Avanti, 610023) 
and PC Membranes 0.4μm (Avanti, 610007). Fluorescence was measured using wavelengths listed in 
Table S5. The FRET calibration is on Figure S76. 
 
10. Whole-cell extract TxTl  
Most of the protein expression experiments in this project were done with pREP transcription-
translation reaction (see methods section 2). Due to high cost and lower protein yields of pREP 
compared to the whole cell extract TxTl, we used TxTl for experiments where pREP was not required: 
establishing and characterizing the genetically encoded synthetic cell growth system. TxTl was only used 
to collec data demonstrated on Figure 2 and its’ corresponding SI figures.  
Protein expression experiments with TxTl were performed using whole cell E. coli extract according to 
the protocol described before76. To grow cells for the extract, 2xYT+P was prepared by mixing 124 g 2xYT 
powder, 160ml potassium phosphate dibasic 1M solution, 88ml potassium phosphate monobasic 1M 
solution and 3.752L water (to total 4L), sterilized in the autoclave on liquid cycle and stored at 4°C until 
use. Rosetta 2(DE3) cells were grown in 2xYT+P media until an OD of 1.5 to 2 was reached. The culture 
was then chilled and washed twice with cold S30A buffer (10.88g Mg-glutamate powder, 24.39g K-
glutamate powder, 50ml of 2M Tris base, and pH adjusted to 7.4 with glacial acetic acid). The cells were 
lysed using sonication, with energy settings according to the previously described protocol 77.  
The lysate was centrifuged at 18,000rcf at 4°C for 30 minutes and the supernatant was shaken at 
2 0rpm at  7°C for one hour for the “runoff reaction.” The lysate was then centrifuged again at 
18,000rcf at 4°C for 30 minutes and the supernatant, the final cell extract, was aliquoted and stored at -
80°C. 
Due to the batch-to-batch variability between different preparations of the cell extract, all data reported 
on the same figure in this paper were prepared using the same batch of cell extract.  
The final TxTl reaction was prepared by mixing cell extract, energy mix, amino acid mix, and salt mix to 
the following final concentrations: 130mM potassium glutamate, 10mM ammonium acetate, 10mM 
magnesium glutamate, 1.5mM ATP and GTP, 0.9mM CTP and UTP, 0.068mM folinic acid, 200ug/mL of E. 
coli tRNA mixture, 0.33mM nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), 0.26mM coenzyme-A (CoA), 
1.5mM spermidine, 4mM sodium oxalate, 0.75mM cAMP, 30mM 3-PGA, 50mM HEPES pH 8, 2mM of 
each of the 20 amino acids in a KOH amino acid stock.  
Unless otherwise stated in the experimental description, the complete TxTl reaction was incubated for 
12 hours at 30°C. 
 
11. Cell cycle with feeder liposome growth and mechanical division  
For each growth and division experiment in the 5-generation cell cycle, liposomes were prepared as 
described above (methods section 4). At the beginning of the experiment, each sample of liposomes 
(1mM total lipid concentration, 30uL) was incubated for 12 hours at 30°C. This was considered 
generation 0. The sample was then mixed with 30μL of 2mM feeder liposomes (see methods section 6 
for preparation), starting generation 1. The mixture of the starting population and the feeder liposomes 
of generation 1 was cultured, with gentle tumbling, at 30°C for 12 hours.  
For each generation, feeder liposomes contained 4nM of one of the “bottom” oligos for the generation 
counter (see methods section 12), and a complete 1x reaction mixture for pREP reaction (methods 
section 2), without any DNA template. Feeder liposomes were labeled with Ni-NTA lipids in the 
membrane (methods section 6).  
At the start of cell cycle experiment, the “generation 0” synthetic cells contained 1nM of each of the 
“top” strands for the generation counter (methods section 12), a complete pREP reaction (methods 
section 2), and DNA templates (typically 10nM each, see methods section 3).  
Typical  0μl lumen of “generation 0” synthetic cells for a cell cycle experiment contained: complete 1x 
pREP reaction (methods section 2), 4μl of plasmid mix (methods section  ), 1μl of a mix of top strands 
for generation counter and 1μl T4 DNA Ligase (methods section 12). 
An orbital shaker placed inside an incubator was used for the incubation steps after addition of feeder 
liposomes. After 12 hours at 30°C, the samples were extruded using a mini-extruder (Avanti, 610023) 
with a 2μm membrane (Whatman, 76457-184). This concluded generation 1.  
The extruded sample was then mixed with another 30μl of 2mM total lipid concentration of feeder 
liposomes, and this started generation 2. This, and each following generation, was similarly cultured for 
12 hours at 30°C with gentle shaking.  
Starting after generation 3, after each 12-hour incubation followed by extrusion, samples were analyzed 
for fluorescence, abundance of DNA, mRNA and generation counter. First, fluorescence of GFP was 
measured using a plate reader (Molecular Devices SpectraMax). Then, liposomes were lysed with 0.1% 
Triton-X 100 (Acros Organics, AC215682500), 0.5M stock EDTA was added to final concentration of 
10mM, and sample was incubated at 65°C for 15 minutes to heat inactivate the synthetic cell enzymes.  
Samples for analysis of newly synthesized DNA abundance were digested with DpnI (NEB R0176) using 5 
units of enzyme per reaction in 1x rCutSmart buffer (NEB B6004), incubated 30min at 37°C, followed by 
heat inactivation for 15min at 80°C. Then all samples were concentrated by lyophilization, and 
resuspended in 1 μl of water. Those samples were used for subsequent analysis of abundance of DNA, 
mRNA and generation counter RNA (methods section 15). 
The cell cycle experiments shown in this work included fluorescent proteins expressed by the synthetic 
cells (GFP in cell cycle experiments, GFP and mCherry in cell cycle competition experiments). To confirm 
that the presence of fluorescent proteins doesn’t change the membrane dynamics and cell cycle results, 
we repeated 5 generations of cell cycle experiments with synthetic cells without GFP. We analyzed new 
DNA and mRNA abundance, comparing it to the results from a similar experiment in presence of GFP, 
results are shown on Figure S40.  
We also tested membrane stability to small molecule leakage in presence of fluorescent proteins. 
Synthetic cells were created with either GFP or mCherry plasmid. The GFP cells contained 1mM of water 
soluble Cy5.5 (Cyanine5.5 carboxylic acid, Luminprobe 17090), and the mCherry cells contained 1mM 
calcein. After 12h incubation at 30°C, cells were purified (methods section 27) to measure leakage of the 
small molecule dye. No leakage was observed with either of the fluorescent proteins, data on Figure S41 
for cells with GFP protein and Cy5.5 small molecule dye, and Figure S42 for cells with mCherry protein 
and calcein small molecule dye. 
To investigate the mRNA stability, DNA stability and fluorescent protein accumulation over the course of 
many hours of synthetic cell “life cycle”, we performed control experiments with cells containing GFP 
plasmid and αHL plasmid. Synthetic cells were prepared with 5nM GFP plasmid and 5nM αHL plasmid. 
Cells were incubated in the synthetic cell culture media (see Supplementary text section 4) for 30 hours. 
The GFP mRNA, DNA and GFP fluorescence were measured at indicted time points, see Figure S43. 
The rationale for mechanical division in cell cycle experiments: In this work, we used more reliable 
mechanical division to decouple the variables: we wanted to optimize conditions for the cell cycle of 
growth and DNA replication, and to investigate the competition and selection processes enabled by the 
genetically encoded feeding mechanism. The mechanical division, being an older and widely used 
technique for dividing liposomes, ensures complete division and uniform size of daughter cells. 
Mechanical division was used in experiments shown on Figures 3, 4 and 5.  
For figure 6, the genetically encoded division was used instead of mechanical division, resulting in 
daughter cells that are less uniform in size (as seen in microscopy images on Figure 6 and Figure S73). 
 
12. Generation counter  
The sequences of all generation counter oligos are in Table S3. All generation counter oligos were 
purchased from IDT DNA as custom synthesized RNA oligos and used without further purification.  
The generation counter reactions require T4 DNA ligase to ligate the “sticky ends” of the generation 
counter oligos (see Figure S45 for the generation counter reaction scheme). The T4 DNA ligase typically 
is used in buffer containing: 50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 10mM MgCl2, 1mM ATP, 10mM DTT (per NEB 
information for product B0202S). However, since this reaction will be required to work in pREP reaction 
conditions in cell cycle experiments, we have tested and optimized the reaction using pREP buffer 
conditions.  
In each generation counter validation experiment, 1nM of each generation counter oligo was mixed. 
Each 20μl reaction thus contained 0.02pmoles of each generation counter oligo (unless otherwise 
stated, in negative control experiments where some oligos were omitted). All generation counter oligos 
were stored as separate 20nM stocks in water. For each experiment, 1μl of each stock was mixed, and 
the resulting mixture of generation counter oligos was lyophilized and resuspended in 2μl water. This 
mixture was used in the generation counter reaction.  
Each 20μl reaction contained 1μl T4 DNA Ligase (NEB, M0202), 1nM of each generation counter oligo 
(from the mixture described above), 0.6mM dATP, 0.6mM dGTP, 0.6mM dCTP, 0.6mM dTTP (Denville 
Scientific CB4420-2), 1x pREP energy mix (see methods section 2) containing 70mM potassium 
glutamate, 7.9mM magnesium glutamate, 0.1M HEPES pH 8.0, 25mM creatine phosphate (Sigma-Aldrich 
27920-5G), 0.375mM spermidine (Sigma-Aldrich S2626-5G), 0.5g/L E. coli tRNAs (Sigma-Aldrich 
10109550001), 10mM DTT (Goldbio DTT50), 0.3775mM ATP (Larova ATP_1000G), 0.25mM GTP (Larova 
GTP_1000G), 0.125mM CTP (Larova CTP_1000G) and 0.125mM UTP (Larova UTP_1000G). 
Most of those components were not essential for the generation counter ligation. Those components 
were included so that the reaction conditions match the final application conditions in cell cycle 
experiments. 
The reactions were incubated at 30°C for 12h. 30°C is not optimal temperature for those ligation 
reactions, but since this was the temperature required in the cell cycle experiments with pREP, this was 
the temperature we used to optimize the reaction. 
After completion of the reaction, the generation counter products were analyzed using RT-qPCR (see 
methods section 15). For each rt-qPCR reaction, 4. μl of the 20μl generation counter ligation reaction 
was used as a template.  
In cell cycle liposome experiments (methods section 11), each starting “parent” synthetic cell population 
contained 1nM of each of the “top” strands for counter for each generation. Those strands were mixed 
from the 20nM stock, lyophilized and resuspended in 1μl, before adding to the liposome lumen solution 
(see methods section 4 for liposome preparation). The feeder liposomes (methods section 6) contained 
4nM of one of the “bottom” generation counter oligos, one for each generation those feeder liposomes 
were used in. The concentration of “bottom” oligo in feeder liposomes was higher than earlier used 
1nM to account for volume dilution when smaller feeder liposome fuses with larger synthetic cell. 
We quantified the abundance of full length generation counter product in single cell experiments after 
3, 4 and 5 generation (Figure S37). 
 
13. Synthetic cell media optimization 
Each sample in the media optimization experiments was prepared with 1mM of liposomes (methods 
section 4), 10nM of αHL and GFP plasmids, and the internal pREP mixture as described above (methods 
section 2). 
The external media mixture was prepared as indicated in the results Figure S15, where 1x indicated the 
energy mix, amino acid mix, and salt mix of the concentrations and compositions described below, and 
the rage of 0.5x and 1.5x are the 1x scaled appropriately.  
The 1x energy mix contained: 1.5mM ATP and GTP, 0.9mM CTP and UTP, 0.068mM folinic acid, 200 
ug/mL of E. coli tRNA mixture, 0.33mM nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), 0.26mM coenzyme-A 
(CoA), 1.5mM spermidine, 4mM sodium oxalate, 0.75mM cAMP, 30mM 3-PGA, 50mM HEPES pH 8. 
The 1x amino acid mix contained: 2mM Alanine, 2mM Arginine, 2mM Asparagine, 2mM Aspartic acid, 
2mM Cysteine, 2mM Glutamic acid, 2mM Glutamine, 2mM Glycine, 2mM Histidine, 2mM Isoleucine, 
2mM Leucine, 2mM Lysine, 2mM Methionine, 2mM Phenylalanine, 2mM Proline, 2mM Serine, 2mM 
Threonine, 2mM Tryptophan, 2mM Tyrosine, 2mM Valine. 
The 1x salt mix contained: 130mM potassium glutamate, 10mM ammonium acetate, and 10mM 
magnesium glutamate. 
For each media optimization experiment,  0μl of 1mM liposomes were diluted in 100μl “media” 
mixture. Samples were incubated at 30°C for 12 hours. After incubation, GFP fluorescence was recorded 
using plate reader (Molecular Devices SpectraMax).  
 
14. qPCR  
Liposome samples for analysis were diluted ( μl of sample into 12. μl) with the inclusion of 5ug of 
RNase A (AG Scientific R-2000-100MG) and incubated at 37°C for 1 hour.  
A 20μl OneTaq PCR was set up with NEB OneTaq 2X Master Mix with Standard Buffer (NEB M0482L) 
with 2μl of the sample as template and following the NEB recommended protocol with the inclusion of 
1x of Chai Green Dye (Chai R01200S). qPCR was read and analyzed on either a Chai Open qPCR machine 
(single or dual channel) or CFX Opus 384 System. 
Calibration curves for qPCR quantification are on Figure S75. 
 
15. RT-qPCR  
Liposome samples for analysis were diluted ( μl of sample into 12. μl) with the inclusion of 1x Turbo 
DNase Buffer, and 1U of Turbo DNase (Invitrogen AM2238), and incubated at 37°C for 1 hour.  
A 10μl reverse transcription reaction was primed via mixing of 4. μl sample, 0. μl of 2μM primer (the 
corresponding forward or reverse primer), 0. μl of 10mM dNTPs (Denville Scientific CB4420-2), and 1μl 
water. This was incubated at 6 °C for 1 minute, followed by at least   minutes on ice. Then 2μl of  x 
Superscript IV RT buffer, 0. μl of 100mM DTT, 0. μl of 200U/μl of Superscript IV RT (Invitrogen 
18090010), and 0. μl 40U/μl RNase Inhibitor Murine (NEB M0 14S) were added.  
Samples were incubated at  2°C for 10 minutes, followed by 80°C for 10 minutes. A 20μl OneTaq PCR 
was set up with NEB OneTaq 2X Master Mix with Standard Buffer (NEB M0482L) with 2μl of the sample 
as template and following the NEB recommended protocol with the inclusion of 1x of Chai Green Dye 
(Chai R01200S). qPCR was read and analyzed on either a Chai Open qPCR machine (single or dual 
channel) or CFX Opus 384 System. 
 
16. Next Generation Sequencing  
After 5 generations of growth and replication, samples were lysed, digested with DpnI (to remove all 
original DNA) and amplified via PCR, which also installed partial Illumina library adapters.  
Samples were sequenced using Azenta Amplicon-EZ sequencing protocol using Illumina NGS sequencing. 
Each cell cycle sample DNA was amplified with primers flanking the promoter region on the αHL plasmid 
(See Table S2 for sequences).  
This amplification installed partial Illumina adapters, for the forward sequencing read:  ’-
ACACTCTTTCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCT- ’ and for the reverse sequencing read:  ’-
GACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCT- ’.  
Amplified DNA was purified on agarose gel and the concentration of the amplicon was measured using 
PicoGreen dsDNA assay kit (Thermo P7589). Samples were analyzed using SNO/INDEL detection 
algorithm, using sequence of T7Max promoter as reference sequence.  
All samples provided over 75000 usable reads.  
 
17. Flow cytometry 
Each sample for flow cytometry was prepared by first dialysis (see Methods section 24) to remove 
feeder vesicles, then diluting liposomes to 0.1mM total lipid concentration in PBS. This was done so all 
samples contain a similar number of particles (liposomes) per unit of volume. Liposomes in PBS were 
assessed for GFP fluorescence (488nm excitation, 525nm-550nm bandpass emission filter) at the 
University of Minnesota Flow Cytometry Resource with a BD LSR II Flow cytometer (Figure 4) or BD 
FACSymphony™ A3 Cell Analyzer (figure 5). Liposomes were measured at a rate of 150-250 events per 
second until 10,000 events were recorded in the designated “liposome” gate.  
Flow cytometry data was analyzed using FlowJo version 10.8.1 software. Samples were analyzed in a 
5mL Polystyrene Round-Bottom Tube (Falcon, REF 352054).  
The phosphate buffered saline (PBS) used here was pH 7.4, containing 137mM sodium chloride, 2.7mM 
potassium chloride, 10mM sodium phosphate dibasic, 1.8mM potassium phosphate monobasic.  
Voltages for each measurement: FSC (586V), SSC (255V), and GFP (220V). 
Each dot on the plot is defined as an “event”. It’s termed this way because not every event is going to be 
a sample of interest. An event can be any kind of contamination- dust, single bacteria cell, a clump of 
proteins, etc. Therefore, a negative and positive control are necessary for flow, because of the need to 
trial and error finding actual data points. In the liposome measurements shown in this paper, we look at 
size (FSC), complexity (SSC), and fluorescence (GFP-A). 
FSC- forward scatter- size. Sensor is directly across from the laser origin. Measures absence of light as 
the event passes through the laser. Larger events will block the light from hitting the sensor for an 
extended period of time. 
SSC- side scatter- complexity. Sensor is perpendicular to the laser path. Measures light that was 
diffracted from its path when the event passed through the laser. More light will hit this sensor if the 
event is more “complex” aka has components that scatter the light. 
FSC and SSC have three components to their measurements: 
W- width. time it takes for the liposome to pass through the laser 
H- height. Maximum intensity of the duration of the width. 
A- area. Width times the height of the event  
 
18. Selection and competition  
The selection and competition experiments using 5 generations of cell cycle were performed according 
to the general cell cycle protocol (see methods section 11). The starting “1x” population of synthetic 
cells was 30μL of 1mM liposomes, as described for cell cycle protocol. If two different populations of 
synthetic cells were mixed for a competition experiment, we used 1 μL of each of the populations. 
The “1x” feeder liposomes were  0μL of 2mM feeder liposomes (see methods section 6 for preparation 
protocol). In competition for resources experiments, where less feeder liposomes were available, we 
kept the total volume of the sample constant, while varying the concentration of feeder liposomes. 
Therefore, “0. x” feeder liposome conditions mean addition of  0μL of 1mM feeder liposomes, “0.2 x” 
is  0μL of 0. mM feeder liposomes, and “0.1x” is  0μL of 0.2mM feeder liposomes. 
All competition and selection experiments were incubated through the cell cycle protocol as described 
above (methods section 11).  
Normalizing GFP and mCherry fluorescence in selection metabolic load experiments: To estimate what 
percent of population carries each of the fluorescent proteins, we performed calibration experiments: 5 
generations of cell cycle, or no cell cycle, with varying ratio of cells with mCherry and with GFP, with the 
same αHL in both populations. This resulted in calibration curves translating measured green (GFP) and 
red (mCherry) fluorescence to relative percent of the synthetic cell population carrying that fluorescent 
protein gene (see Figure S56).  
 
19. Dynamic Light Scattering  
The DLS experiments were performed using Microtrac NanoFlex DLS Particle Analyzer. The data was 
analyzed using Microtrac Flex software, assuming the liposomes were spherical. Each sample was 
prepared by diluting liposomes to approximately 0.1mM total lipid concentration in PBS. This was done 
so all samples contain a similar number of particles (liposomes) per unit of volume. 
All synthetic cell liposomes for DLS experiments were prepared as described in Methods section 4, and 
then before the start of the experiment the liposomes were extruded through 0.8μm extruder 
membrane. This was to ensure uniformed size distribution at the beginning of the experiment, mindful 
of the limitations of DLS technique in analyzing heterogenous samples.  
The phosphate buffered saline (PBS) used here was pH 7.4, containing 137mM sodium chloride, 2.7mM 
potassium chloride, 10mM sodium phosphate dibasic, 1.8mM potassium phosphate monobasic.  
Prior to each sample analysis, a baseline of zero was set using a blank solution (PBS). The average values 
were obtained based on six individual runs of 120s each. 
We recognize the limitations of using DLS: synthetic cell liposomes, particularly ones that undergo 
spontaneous curvature changes and division, will likely be a heterogenous population, while DLS 
measurements are the most reliable homogenous samples. Thus, the DLS measurements were used as 
an initial test for synthetic cell division, to be confirmed with more quantitative measurements in bead 
experiments.  
The only experiments in this paper that used DLS were the division tests.  
 
20. Immobilization of synthetic cell liposomes on beads 
To immobilize synthetic cell liposomes, the liposomes were prepared with 1mol% of 16:0 azidocaproyl 
PE (1,2-dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-(6-azidohexanoyl), Avanti 870126P). The 
liposomes were prepared using the same method used for all other experiments in this project 
(methods section 4). Each  0μl sample of 1mM liposomes labeled with 1mol% of the azido lipid contains 
10μM azido lipid. The azido lipid was added during the preparation of thin film, mixing 2. 4μl of the 
0.1mg/ml stock with the rest of the lipids in chloroform.  
DBCO tagged magnetic beads (Kerafast FCC433) were washed three times with 50mM HEPES pH 8. The 
manufacturer’s reported bead loading is 30-50nmol DBCO groups per mg. In each experiment, 5mg 
beads (approximately 250nmol DBCO) were mixed with 30μl liposomes (0.3nmol azide, although since 
both inner and outer leaflet are labeled, only half of the total azide groups is available for the 
conjugation). Azide labeled liposomes were mixed with the DBCO beads and incubated at 30°C for 8 
hours. The samples were gently mixed by shaking. During the incubation, the translation reaction inside 
synthetic cells was also started. 
To confirm immobilization rates, beads of three control samples were pulled down (using magnetic PCR 
tube rack), and the solution from above the beads was collected. After collecting the “supernatant” 
above the beads, 20μl of 50mM HEPES pH 8 with 0.1% Triton-X 100 (Acros Organics, AC215682500) was 
added to lyse the liposomes. The lysed liposome solution was also collected. Both the solution from 
above liposome-beads and the lysed liposome solutions were lyophilized dry, and re-suspended in 2μl 
50mM HEPES pH 8. Both solutions were used as template in qPCR reaction with primers for αHL plasmid 
(present in the liposomes). In all three control samples, αHL plasmid was detected in the samples from 
lysed liposomes at quantities corresponding to the initial concentration of αHL plasmid (10nM plasmid) 
– indicating αHL carrying liposomes were immobilized on beads, and no detectable αHL was found in 
any of the samples from solution collected from above the beads with liposomes (indicating that no 
detectable free liposomes were left in the solution). This confirmed that the immobilization protocol 
with large excess of beads to liposome azide tag results in immobilization of all available liposomes on 
the beads. 
Since large excess DBCO beads was used, there are unreacted DBCO groups that could bind to azide on 
newly divided cells, trapping new daughter cells and defeating the purpose of the experimental design 
(which assumes daughter cells will be free and separated from beads). To avoid this, we have blocked 
the unreacted DBCO groups before the division experiments. After initial 8h incubation to couple 
synthetic cells to the beads, 7μl of a 50mM stock solution of 3-Azido-L-alanine (Jena, CLK-AA003) in 
50mM HEPES pH 8 was added (350nmol azide), and incubated for 4h. After the blocking reaction, 
samples were ready for division experiments.  
 
21. Genetically encoded division of synthetic cells 
Purified streptavidin (BioLegend, 280302) manufacturer stock of 1.0 mg/ml (19μM) was diluted in 50mM 
HEPES pH 8 to a working stock concentration of 5μM and stored at 4°C. Biotin-NTA linker (Biotin 
nitrilotriacetic acid, VWR 90074) was resuspended in 100mM HEPES pH 8 to a stock concentration of 
20μM and stored at 4°C. 
1ml of 1nM liposomes of 1 micron diameter is approximately 6.71E+10 liposomes58, which is 
approximately 0.003 picomoles of liposome particles in 30μl sample. To allow an approximate excess of 
1000 streptavidin particles per liposome, each 30μl sample needs to contain 3 picomoles of streptavidin, 
giving 0.1μM concentration of streptavidin. The biotin-NTA linker was used in 4x excess (to account for 
most of the biotin linker being bound to streptavidin, which has 4 binding sites for biotin), resulting in 
0.4μM of biotin linker in each sample. For each 30μl synthetic cell liposome sample, 0.6μl of 5μM 
streptavidin stock and 0.6μl of 20μM biotin linker stock were used. The biotin linker was pre-incubated 
with streptavidin at 30°C for 10 minutes. 
For all division experiments, synthetic cells were prepared as for the cell cycle experiments (methods 
section 11), but without the generation counter oligos.  
For each division experiment with synthetic cells free in solution (not immobilized),  0μl synthetic cells 
were mixed with 1.2μl of the pre-incubated streptavidin – biotin linker solution. Samples were 
incubated for 12h at 30°C with gentle shaking (in PCR tube on a shaker inside incubator). After 
incubation, the cells were diluted to 0.1mM total lipid concentration in PBS and analyzed using dynamic 
light scattering measurements (methods section 19). 
For each division experiment with immobilized synthetic cells, 5mg beads with immobilized  0μl 
synthetic cells (after azide blocking) were mixed with 1.2μl of the pre-incubated streptavidin – biotin 
linker solution. Samples were incubated for 12h at 30°C with gentle shaking (in PCR tube on a shaker 
inside incubator).  
After incubation, magnetic beads were pulled down (using magnetic PCR plate), and the solution from 
above beads was gently removed. The beads were washed with 50μL of 100mM HEPES pH 8, and the 
wash solution was combined with the initially removed solution, creating the “daughter cells” fraction. 
The liposomes in this combined “daughter cells” fraction were lysed with 0.1% Triton-X 100 (Acros 
Organics, AC215682500) for 10 minutes, lyophilized (to concentrate), and resuspended in  μl water.  
The magnetic beads with remaining cells still attached were resuspended in 100μL of 100mM HEPES pH 
8 and liposomes were lysed with 0.1% Triton- X 100 for 10 minutes. The lysed liposome solution was 
removed from the beads, lyophilized (to concentrate), and resuspended in  μl water. The “free off 
beads daughter fraction” and “attached to beads fraction” solutions were analyzed using qPCR 
(methods section 14).  
In competitive growth experiments, two populations of synthetic cells were mixed: each population on 
5mg beads with immobilized  0μl synthetic cells, the cells were identical except one containing T7Max 
αHL gene and the other T7 αHL gene. The competitive division samples were incubated and processed 
as described above, except all wash and resuspension volumes were doubled.  
Two plasmids were used as unique DNA markers to track the T7 and T7Max populations in samples 
where those two types of cells were mixed for competitive division. To avoid adding extra metabolic 
burden, we chose two plasmids that did not express in bacterial system: a GFP plasmid and mCherry 
plasmid, both under control of a mammalian CMV promoter. Those plasmids were used here only to 
mark otherwise identical synthetic cells, since T7 and T7Max promoters are similar enough that it’s 
difficult to reliably differentiate them with qPCR primers. Both marker plasmids were encapsulated in 
synthetic cells at 10nM, the CMV-GFP plasmid in T7 cells and the CMV-mCherry plasmid in T7Max cells.  
After competitive growth experiments, “daughter fraction” was removed and samples were processed 
as described above.  
 
22. Genetically encoded growth and division 
Synthetic cells were prepared with as described earlier (methods section 4) with complete genome, plus 
10nM FLAG-tagged αHL, and with 1mol% azido lipid for immobilization (methods section 20). The feeder 
liposomes were prepared as described earlier, with Ni-NTA and pREP reaction (methods section 6).  
Biotin conjugated FLAG tag antibody (Abcam, ab173832) manufacturer stock of 1mg/mL (28μM, 
assuming 35kDa molecular weight) was diluted to working stock of 20μM and stored at 4°C.  
Similar to His-tag based division experiments (methods section 21), for the FLAG tag based division we 
used 0.1μM final concentration of streptavidin and 0.4μM of biotin FLAG antibody linker in each sample. 
For each  0μl synthetic cell liposome sample, 0.6μl of  μM streptavidin stock and 0.6μl of 20μM biotin 
FLAG antibody linker stock were used. The antibody linker was pre-incubated with streptavidin at 30°C 
for 10 minutes. 
Feeder liposomes were prepared as previously described (methods section 6). 5mg beads with 
immobilized  0μl synthetic cells (after azide blocking) were mixed with 1.2μl of the pre-incubated 
streptavidin – biotin linker solution and  0μl feeder liposomes. In those experiments, the immobilized 
“parent” synthetic cells carried only generation counter “top” oligos gen1, gen2 and gen , and feeder 
liposomes carried generation counter “bottom” oligos gen1, gen2 and gen .  The presence of full-length 
generation counter oligo was detected using primers for gen3 (see methods section 12). Despite this 
being single generation experiment, 3 generation counter oligos were used, to allow formation of a 
product long enough for unambiguous detection. 
Samples were incubated for 12h at 30°C with gentle shaking (in PCR tube on a shaker inside incubator). 
After incubation, magnetic beads were pulled down (using magnetic PCR plate), and the solution from 
above beads was gently removed. The beads were washed with 30μL of 100mM HEPES pH 8, and the 
wash solution was combined with the initially removed solution. The liposomes in this solution were 
lysed with 0.1% Triton-X 100 (Acros Organics, AC215682500) for 10 minutes, lyophilized (to 
concentrate), and resuspended in  μl water. The magnetic beads with remaining cells still attached were 
resuspended in 50μL of 100mM HEPES pH 8 and liposomes were lysed with 0.1% Triton-X 100 for 10 
minutes. The lysed liposome solution was removed from the beads, lyophilized (to concentrate), and 
resuspended in  μl water. The “free off beads” and “attached to beads” solutions were analyzed using 
qPCR (methods section 14).  
 
23. Single cell plasmid and generation counter product abundance 
To estimate distribution of plasmids in daughter cells after growth and division, we first dialyzed the 
cells, to remove feeder liposomes (see Methods section 24). Cells were then diluted to OD 0.2 normalize 
cell concentration. Then we proceed to dilute the samples to obtain single cell per experiment. This was 
done at 4°C (in the cold room), working very fast through the sequential dilution protocol, to avoid 
leakage from synthetic cells as the dilution approaches critical aggregation concentration (CAC).  
To achieve highest possible likelihood of single synthetic cell per reaction, we diluted the samples so 
that theoretical concentration is approximately 1 synthetic cell per 1μl, and we collected 0.8μl of each 
aliquot for analysis. This means that it is possible many of the aliquots will be empty (containing no 
cells). This would skew the plasmid abundance analysis. To ensure that only samples with a cell present 
will be analyzed, we analyzed the samples for presence of 16S RNA, with the assumption that any 
sample that has ribosomes has a synthetic cell. Since abundance of ribosomes in each cell was 
significantly higher than abundance of plasmid DNA copies, it is likely that a daughter synthetic cell 
might not have any copies of the genome, but as long as it has a cytoplasm, it will have ribosomes.  
Each putative single cell aliquot sample (384 in total) were used as a template in reverse transcription, 
followed by qPCR amplification reaction with E. coli 16S RNA primers.78 
Each initial 16S test 10μl reverse transcription reaction was prepared mixing of 0.8μl of the putative 
single cell sample, 0. μl of 2μM primer (forward 16S primer, see Table S2 for all the primer sequences), 
0. μl of 10mM dNTPs (Denville Scientific CB4420-2), and 4.7μl water. This was incubated at 6 °C for 1 
minute, followed by at least   minutes on ice. Then 2μl of  x Superscript IV RT buffer, 0. μl of 100mM 
DTT, 0. μl of 200U/μl of Superscript IV RT (Invitrogen 18090010), and 0. μl 40U/μl RNase Inhibitor 
Murine (NEB M0314S) were added. Samples were incubated at 52°C for 10 minutes, followed by 80°C 
for 10 minutes. A 20μl OneTaq PCR was set up with NEB OneTaq 2X Master Mix with Standard Buffer 
(NEB M0482) with 2μl of the RT sample as template (saving the remaining 8μl in -80°C) and following the 
NEB recommended protocol with the inclusion of 1x of Chai Green Dye (Chai R01200S). qPCR was read 
and analyzed on either a Chai Open qPCR machine (single or dual channel) or CFX Opus 384 System. 
Of the 384 aliquots initially analyzed, 16S RNA was detected in 204 samples. We have selected 95 
samples for further processing, selecting the samples with lowest abundance of 16S RNA (further 
maximizing chances that those samples contained only one and not more cells).  
This is the only experiment in this project where some samples were removed from further processing 
and analysis based on initial screening.  
The 95 samples selected for further processing were used as templates in a multiplex PCR reaction, to 
amplify the DNA of all 7 plasmids. Following primers were used for detection of polycistronic plasmids: 
for pLD1 we used primers for HisRS, for pLD2 we used primers for AlaRS, and for pLD3 we used primers 
for ProRS. A master mix was prepared with all forward and reverse primers, with concentration of 1μM 
each primer. Each multiplex PCR reaction was prepared using 3.75µl primer stock, 5µl Multiplex PCR 5X 
Master Mix (NEB, M0284), 8µl of the template (the remaining volume from the above described 16S test 
reactions) and 8.25µl water. The 40 cycles PCR reaction was performed according to manufacturer’s 
protocol. After this amplification, the PCR product was used as a template in 7 individual qPCR reactions, 
one for each plasmid DNA, performed according to the above-described general qPCR protocol (see 
methods section 14). The results are on Figure S32 and Figure S33 and Figure S37.  
 
24. Dialysis of feeder liposomes 
Synthetic cells and feeder liposomes were prepared, and cell cycle experiments were performed, as 
described earlier (methods section 11). After each 12h generation incubation, samples were dialyzed for 
4h against 1μm filter to remove free feeder liposomes.  
A liposome dialyzer was prepared by modifying 0.5ml Thermo Scientific Slide-A-Lyzer MINI dialysis 
devices (similarly to the procedure described earlier79 for an older style Slide-A-Lyzer cassettes). The 
dialysis membrane in each device was replaced with a 1μm Polycarbonate (PCTE) Membrane Filters 
(Sterlitech, PCT1029320).  
Sample of synthetic cells with feeder vesicles after 12h generation incubation was placed in the 
modified dialysis device, and the bottom tube was filled with 100mM HEPES pH 8. Samples were 
dialyzed for 4h, then removed from the dialyzer device, extruded (as described in methods section 11) 
and next generation was started by addition of next population of feeder liposomes.  
The 4h dialysis time was chosen based on a calibration experiment, where large 2-3μm liposomes were 
mixed with small 0.4μm liposomes (large modeling synthetic cells and small liposomes modeling feeder 
liposomes).  
The small “feeder” 0.4μm liposomes were prepared with 10nM GFP plasmid (no transcription and 
translation system, just plasmid for quantitative detection). The large liposomes were prepared to 
model “parent” synthetic cells in the growth and feeding experiments, with average diameter of 2-3μm, 
those liposomes were filled with 10nM αHL plasmid (no transcription and translation system, just 
plasmid for quantitative detection). Each sample was prepared by mixing 30μl of 1mM lipid liposomes of 
the small and large type each, gently mixing by flipping the tube, and placing the solution in a dialyzer. 
The samples were dialyzed for up to 6 hours. After each hour, a sample was removed from the dialyzer 
device, lysed with 0.1% Triton-X 100 (Acros Organics, AC215682500), lyophilized (to concentrate) and 
resuspended in 10μl water. Those samples were analyzed using qPCR (see methods section 14) to 
quantify amount of αHL plasmid (proxy for concentration of the large synthetic cell liposomes) and 
amount of GFP plasmid (proxy for concentration of the small model feeder liposomes). Results of this 
calibration are on Figure S26. 
 
25. Western blot 
Samples for Western blot analysis of protein expression in solution (without vesicles) were mixed 
directly with loading buffer, liposome samples were first lysed with 0.1% Triton X-100. Samples were 
mixed 1:1 with 2X SDS loading buffer (100mM Tris HCl, 2.5% SDS, 20% Glycerol, 4% Beta -
mercaptoethanol, 0.1% bromophenol blue). Samples in loading buffer were incubated at 95°C for 5 
minutes (in a thermocycler), and then loaded on a 37.5:1  Acrylamide:Bis-Acrylamide SDS-Page gel in a 
Mini-PROTEAN tank (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, with Bio-Rad Power Pac 3000 
power supply. Gels were run for 60 minutes at 100V in 800 mL of 1X SDS running buffer (25mM Tris, 
192mM Glycine, 3.5mM SDS). Gels were then transferred to a 0.2μm nitrocellulose membrane. Transfer 
was done for 60 minutes at 100V in 1L of 1X transfer buffer (25mM Tris, 192mM Glycine).  
After transfer, membrane was incubated with 5% nonfat milk in TBST (20mM Tris, pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 
0.05% tween) for 60 minutes on a horizontal rocker, then mouse IgG1 anti-his primary antibodies 
(BioLegend, 652505) were added at 1:5000 dilution. The 5% nonfat milk TBST and mouse IgG1 mixture 
incubated with the membrane for 60 minutes on a horizontal rocker. After incubation with primary 
antibodies, the membrane was rinsed three times with TBST followed by three 10 min washes in TBST. 
The membrane was next added to 5% nonfat milk in TBST containing horseradish peroxidase-conjugate 
goat anti-mouse IgG1 secondary antibodies (Biolegend 405306) diluted at 1:5000 and incubated on a 
horizontal rocker for 60 minutes. After incubation with secondary antibodies, the membrane was rinsed 
three times with TBST followed by three 10 minute washes in TBST.  
Blots were developed with SuperSignal (Thermo Scientific, 34577 ) immunoblotting detection system 
according to manufacturer’s protocols. Blots were imaged using the ChemiDoc MP Imaging System (Bio-
Rad) running Image Lab version 5.2.1. 
 
26. Summary of statistical analysis  
The main figures present data as heat maps or densely packed plots, leaving limited opportunity to 
illustrate statistical significance calculations. P values were calculated using 2-tailed equal variance T-test 
with graphical representation of P values following this convention: ns = P > 0.0 ; * = P ≤ 0.0 , ** = P ≤ 
0.01, *** = P ≤ 0.001; n/a when results are undetectable and P value was not calculated. 
Statistical analysis for data presented on Figure 2 is on Figure S6 and Figure S7, and Figure S13.  
Statistical analysis for data presented on Figure 3 is in Table S9.  
Statistical analysis for data presented on Figure 4 is in Table S10.  
Statistical analysis for data presented on Figure 5 is on Figure S62 and in Table S11. 
Statistical analysis for data presented on Figure 6 is on Figure S67 and Table S12. 
 
27. Size exclusion purification 
Size exclusion purification experiments were used to separate the liposomes from unencapsulated 
solute fractions.   
For each purification experiment, a 10ml plastic column (Poly-Prep Chromatography Column, Biorad 
7311550) was filled with Sepharose 4B 45-16  μm bead diameter ethanol slurry (Sigma Aldrich 4B200-
1L). The ethanol slurry was allowed to settle by gravitational draining of the solvent, and the column was 
washed with minimum 4 column volumes of 50mM HEPES pH 8.0. Great care as taken to avoid 
disturbing the beads on top of the column. After washing, the buffer was allowed to drain until the 
buffer level nearly touched the top of beads, and liposome sample was loaded on top of the column. 
During loading, the sample was applied in small drops over the entire surface of the top of the column.  
The typical loading volumes were from 50 to 100µl, with the minimal loading volume that in our hands 
produced good purification results being 20µl.  
After loading the sample, 50mM HEPES pH 8.0buffer was immediately applied to cover the top of the 
column, avoiding drying the sample. The column was eluted under gravity, without speeding up the flow 
of the buffer. Samples were collected into 96-well plate using fraction collector (Gilson FC203B). 
Minimum 48 wells were filled during each purification, enough to ensure all liposomes and free solute 
fraction were thoroughly eluted.  
After purification, samples were analyzed using plate reader, and when needed, samples were 
recovered from the wells, concentrated by lyophilization, and analyzed further.   
References  
 
1. Olivi, L. et al. Towards a synthetic cell cycle. Nature Communications 12, 1–11 (2021). 
2. Gaut, N. J. & Adamala, K. P. Reconstituting Natural Cell Elements in Synthetic Cells. Advanced 
Biology 5, 1–20 (2021). 
3. Spoelstra, W. K., Deshpande, S. & Dekker, C. Tailoring the appearance: what will synthetic cells look 
like? Current Opinion in Biotechnology 51, 47–56 (2018). 
4. Buddingh’, B. C. & van Hest, J. C. M. Artificial cells: Synthetic compartments with life-like 
functionality and adaptivity. Acc. Chem. Res. 50, 769–777 (2017). 
5. Rothschild, L. J. et al. Building Synthetic Cells─From the Technology Infrastructure to Cellular 
Entities. ACS Synth. Biol. 13, 974–997 (2024). 
6. Hutchison, C. A. et al. Design and synthesis of a minimal bacterial genome. Science 351, 1414 
(2016). 
7. Xu, C., Martin, N., Li, M. & Mann, S. Living material assembly of bacteriogenic protocells. Nature 
609, 1029–1037 (2022). 
8. Abil, Z. & Danelon, C. Roadmap to building a cell: An evolutionary approach. Front. Bioeng. 
Biotechnol. 8, 927 (2020). 
9. Salehi-Reyhani, A., Ces, O. & Elani, Y. Artificial cell mimics as simplified models for the study of cell 
biology. Experimental Biology and Medicine 242, 1309–1317 (2017). 
10. Tanwar, L. & Devaraj, N. K. Engineering materials for artificial cells. Current Opinion in Solid State 
and Materials Science 26, 101004 (2022). 
11. Chi, H. et al. Engineering and modification of microbial chassis for systems and synthetic biology. 
Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 4, 25–33 (2019). 
12. Moya, A. A. et al. Toward minimal bacterial cells: Evolution vs. design. FEMS Microbiology Reviews 
33, 225–235 (2009). 
13. Garenne, D., Thompson, S., Brisson, A., Khakimzhan, A. & Noireaux, V. The all-E. coliTXTL toolbox 
3.0: new capabilities of a cell-free synthetic biology platform. Synthetic Biology 6, 1–8 (2021). 
14. Noireaux, V., Bar-Ziv, R. & Libchaber, A. Principles of cell-free genetic circuit assembly. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 100, 12672–12677 (2003). 
15. Shimizu, Y. et al. Cell-free translation reconstituted with purified components. Nature 
biotechnology 19, 751–755 (2001). 
16. Fujiwara, K., Katayama, T. & Nomura, S. I. M. Cooperative working of bacterial chromosome 
replication proteins generated by a reconstituted protein expression system. Nucleic Acids 
Research 41, 7176–7183 (2013). 
17. Su’etsugu, M., Takada, H., Katayama, T. & Tsujimoto, H. Exponential propagation of large circular 
DNA by reconstitution of a chromosome-replication cycle. Nucleic Acids Research 45, 11525–11534 
(2017). 
18. Van Nies, P. et al. Self-replication of DNA by its encoded proteins in liposome-based synthetic cells. 
Nature Communications 9, 1–12 (2018). 
19. Blanco, L. & Salas, M. Characterization and purification of a phage ∅29-encoded DNA polymerase 
required for the initiation of replication. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America 81, 5325–5329 (1984). 
20. Libicher, K., Hornberger, R., Heymann, M. & Mutschler, H. In vitro self-replication and multicistronic 
expression of large synthetic genomes. Nature Communications 11, 1–8 (2020). 
21. Chan, Y.-H. M. H. M., van Lengerich, B. & Boxer, S. G. Effects of linker sequences on vesicle fusion 
mediated by lipid-anchored DNA oligonucleotides. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
of the United States of America 106, 979–984 (2009). 
22. Rawle, R. J., Villamil Giraldo, A. M., Boxer, S. G. & Kasson, P. M. Detecting and Controlling Dye 
Effects in Single-Virus Fusion Experiments. Biophysical Journal 117, 445–452 (2019). 
23. Stengel, G., Zahn, R. & Höök, F. DNA-induced programmable fusion of phospholipid vesicles. Journal 
of the American Chemical Society 129, 9584–9585 (2007). 
24. Löffler, P. M. G. et al. A DNA-Programmed Liposome Fusion Cascade. Angewandte Chemie - 
International Edition 56, 13228–13231 (2017). 
25. Yomo, T. et al. Mimicking Cellular Metabolism in Artificial Cells: Universal Molecule Transport 
across the Membrane through Vesicle Fusion. Analytical Chemistry 94, 3811–3818 (2022). 
26. Xu, B. et al. Photoinducible Azobenzene trimethylammonium bromide (AzoTAB)-mediated giant 
vesicle fusion compatible with synthetic protein translation reactions. Biochemical and Biophysical 
Research Communications (2022) doi:10.1016/J.BBRC.2022.06.035. 
27. Deshpande, S., Wunnava, S., Hueting, D. & Dekker, C. Membrane Tension–Mediated Growth of 
Liposomes. Small 15, e1902898 (2019). 
28. Bhattacharya, A., Brea, R. J., Niederholtmeyer, H. & Devaraj, N. K. A minimal biochemical route 
towards de novo formation of synthetic phospholipid membranes. Nature Communications 10, 1–8 
(2019). 
29. Podolsky, K. A. & Devaraj, N. K. Synthesis of lipid membranes for artificial cells. Nature Reviews 
Chemistry 5, 676–694 (2021). 
30. Eto, S. et al. Phospholipid synthesis inside phospholipid membrane vesicles. Commun. Biol. 5, 1016 
(2022). 
31. Blanken, D., Foschepoth, D., Serrão, A. C. & Danelon, C. Genetically controlled membrane synthesis 
in liposomes. Nat. Commun. 11, 4317 (2020). 
32. Sierra, A. M. R., Gomez, F. R., van Tongeren, M., Heras, L. S. & Danelon, C. A synthetic cell with 
integrated DNA self-replication and membrane biosynthesis. bioRxiv 2025.01.14.632951 (2025) 
doi:10.1101/2025.01.14.632951. 
33. Exterkate, M., Caforio, A., Stuart, M. C. A. & Driessen, A. J. M. Growing Membranes in Vitro by 
Continuous Phospholipid Biosynthesis from Free Fatty Acids. ACS Synthetic Biology 7, 153–165 
(2018). 
34. Gaut, N. J. et al. Programmable Fusion and Differentiation of Synthetic Minimal Cells. ACS Synthetic 
Biology 11, 855–866 (2022). 
35. Fujii, S. et al. Liposome display for in vitro selection and evolution of membrane proteins. Nature 
Protocols 9, 1578–1591 (2014). 
36. Okauchi, H. & Ichihashi, N. Continuous Cell-Free Replication and Evolution of Artificial Genomic 
DNA in a Compartmentalized Gene Expression System. ACS Synthetic Biology 10, 3507–3517 (2021). 
37. Forster, A. C. & Church, G. M. Towards synthesis of a minimal cell. Molecular systems biology 2, 45 
(2006). 
38. Adamski, P. et al. From self-replication to replicator systems en route to de novo life. Nat. Rev. 
Chem. 4, 386–403 (2020). 
39. Kriebisch, C. M. E. et al. A roadmap toward the synthesis of life. Chem 102399 (2025) 
doi:10.1016/j.chempr.2024.102399. 
40. Kretschmer, S., Ganzinger, K. A., Franquelim, H. G. & Schwille, P. Synthetic cell division via 
membrane-transforming molecular assemblies. BMC Biol. 17, 43 (2019). 
41. Kattan, J., Doerr, A., Dogterom, M. & Danelon, C. Shaping liposomes by cell-free expressed bacterial 
microtubules. ACS Synth. Biol. 10, 2447–2455 (2021). 
42. Bashirzadeh, Y. & Liu, A. P. Encapsulation of the cytoskeleton: towards mimicking the mechanics of 
a cell. Soft Matter 15, 8425–8436 (2019). 
43. Reverte-López, M. et al. Self-organized spatial targeting of contractile actomyosin rings for 
synthetic cell division. Nat. Commun. 15, 10415 (2024). 
44. Godino, E. et al. Cell-free biogenesis of bacterial division proto-rings that can constrict liposomes. 
Commun. Biol. 3, 539 (2020). 
45. Godino, E. et al. De novo synthesized Min proteins drive oscillatory liposome deformation and 
regulate FtsA-FtsZ cytoskeletal patterns. Nat. Commun. 10, 4969 (2019). 
46. Baldauf, L., van Buren, L., Fanalista, F. & Koenderink, G. H. Actomyosin-driven division of a synthetic 
cell. ACS Synth. Biol. 11, 3120–3133 (2022). 
47. De Dios Andres, P. et al. Flippase-mediated hybrid vesicle division. Adv. Mater. 37, e2504519 
(2025). 
48. Tran, M. P. et al. Genetic encoding and expression of RNA origami cytoskeletons in synthetic cells. 
bioRxiv 2024.06.12.598448 (2024) doi:10.1101/2024.06.12.598448. 
49. Zhan, P., Jahnke, K., Liu, N. & Göpfrich, K. Functional DNA-based cytoskeletons for synthetic cells. 
Nat. Chem. 14, 958–963 (2022). 
50. Daly, M. L. et al. Designer peptide-DNA cytoskeletons regulate the function of synthetic cells. Nat. 
Chem. 16, 1229–1239 (2024). 
51. Novosedlik, S. et al. Cytoskeleton-functionalized synthetic cells with life-like mechanical features 
and regulated membrane dynamicity. Nat. Chem. (2025) doi:10.1038/s41557-024-01697-5. 
52. Sauter, D. et al. Artificial cytoskeleton assembly for synthetic cell motility. Macromol. Biosci. 23, 
e2200437 (2023). 
53. Vutukuri, H. R. et al. Active particles induce large shape deformations in giant lipid vesicles. Nature 
586, 52–56 (2020). 
54. Wang, Y. et al. Biomolecular condensates mediate bending and scission of endosome membranes. 
Nature 634, 1204–1210 (2024). 
55. Lavickova, B., Laohakunakorn, N. & Maerkl, S. J. A partially self-regenerating synthetic cell. Nat. 
Commun. 11, 6340 (2020). 
56. Kosaka, Y. et al. Autonomous ribosome biogenesis in vitro. Nat. Commun. 16, 514 (2025). 
57. Noireaux, V. & Libchaber, A. A vesicle bioreactor as a step toward an artificial cell assembly. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101, 17669–17674 
(2004). 
58. Adamala, K. P., Martin-Alarcon, D. A., Guthrie-Honea, K. R. & Boyden, E. S. Engineering genetic 
circuit interactions within and between synthetic minimal cells. Nature Chemistry 9, 431–439 
(2017). 
59. Tang, T. Y. D. et al. Gene-Mediated Chemical Communication in Synthetic Protocell Communities. 
ACS Synthetic Biology 7, 339–346 (2018). 
60. Hilburger, C. E., Jacobs, M. L., Lewis, K. R., Peruzzi, J. A. & Kamat, N. P. Controlling Secretion in 
Artificial Cells with a Membrane AND Gate. ACS Synthetic Biology 8, 1224–1230 (2019). 
61. Thomas, J. M., Friddin, M. S., Ces, O. & Elani, Y. Programming membrane permeability using 
integrated membrane pores and blockers as molecular regulators. Chemical Communications 53, 
12282–12285 (2017). 
62. Harjung, A., Fracassi, A. & Devaraj, N. K. Encoding extracellular modification of artificial cell 
membranes using engineered self-translocating proteins. Nat. Commun. 15, 9363 (2024). 
63. Song, L. et al. Structure of staphylococcal α-hemolysin, a heptameric transmembrane pore. Science 
274, 1859–1866 (1996). 
64. Chalmeau, J., Monina, N., Shin, J., Vieu, C. & Noireaux, V. α-Hemolysin pore formation into a 
supported phospholipid bilayer using cell-free expression. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta - 
Biomembranes 1808, 271–278 (2011). 
65. Shepherd, T. R. et al. De novodesign and synthesis of a 30-cistron translation-factor module. Nucleic 
Acids Research 45, 10895–10905 (2017). 
66. Abil, Z. et al. Darwinian evolution of self-replicating DNA in a synthetic protocell. Nat. Commun. 15, 
9091 (2024). 
67. Deich, C. et al. T7Max transcription system. Journal of Biological Engineering 17, 4 (2023). 
68. Snead, W. T. et al. Membrane fission by protein crowding. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 114, E3258–
E3267 (2017). 
69. Steinkühler, J. et al. Controlled division of cell-sized vesicles by low densities of membrane-bound 
proteins. Nat. Commun. 11, 905 (2020). 
70. Thornburg, Z. R. et al. Fundamental behaviors emerge from simulations of a living minimal cell. Cell 
185, 345-360.e28 (2022). 
71. Tror, S., Jeon, S., Nguyen, H. T., Huh, E. & Shin, K. A self-regenerating artificial cell, that is one step 
closer to living cells: Challenges and perspectives. Small Methods 7, e2300182 (2023). 
72. De Capitani, J. & Mutschler, H. The long road to a synthetic self-replicating central dogma. 
Biochemistry 62, 1221–1232 (2023). 
73. Garamella, J., Marshall, R., Rustad, M. & Noireaux, V. The All E. coli TX-TL Toolbox 2.0: A Platform 
for Cell-Free Synthetic Biology. ACS Synth. Biol. 5, 344–355 (2016). 
74. Caschera, F. & Noireaux, V. Compartmentalization of an all-E. coli Cell-Free Expression System for 
the Construction of a Minimal Cell. Artificial Life 22, 1–11 (2016). 
75. Meyenberg, K., Lygina, A. S., van den Bogaart, G., Jahn, R. & Diederichsen, U. SNARE derived 
peptide mimic inducing membrane fusion. Chemical Communications 47, 9405–9407 (2011). 
76. Sun, Z. Z. et al. Protocols for Implementing an Escherichia coli Based TX-TL Cell-Free Expression 
System for Synthetic Biology. Journal of Visualized Experiments 1–15 (2013) doi:10.3791/50762. 
77. Kwon, Y.-C. C. & Jewett, M. C. High-throughput preparation methods of crude extract for robust 
cell-free protein synthesis. Scientific Reports 5, 8663 (2015). 
78. Lee, M. S. et al. Molecular diagnosis of periprosthetic joint infection by quantitative RT-PCR of 
bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA. ScientificWorldJournal 2013, 950548 (2013). 
79. Adamala, K., Engelhart, A. E., Kamat, N. P., Jin, L. & Szostak, J. W. Construction of a liposome 
dialyzer for the preparation of high-value, small-volume liposome formulations. Nat. Protoc. 10, 
927–938 (2015). 
80. Faridani, O. R., Mcinerney, G. M., Gradin, K. & Good, L. Specific ligation to double-stranded RNA for 
analysis of cellular RNA::RNA interactions. Nucleic Acids Research 36, e99 (2008). 
81. Robinson, A. O., Lee, J., Cameron, A., Keating, C. D. & Adamala, K. P. Cell-Free Expressed 
Membraneless Organelles Inhibit Translation in Synthetic Cells. ACS Biomater Sci Eng (2024) 
doi:10.1021/acsbiomaterials.3c01052. 
82. Roodbeen, R. & van Hest, J. C. M. Synthetic cells and organelles: compartmentalization strategies. 
Bioessays 31, 1299–1308 (2009). 
83. Linsenmeier, M. et al. Dynamics of synthetic membraneless organelles in microfluidic droplets. 
Angew. Chem. Weinheim Bergstr. Ger. 131, 14631–14636 (2019). 
84. Borges-Fernandes, B. et al. The minimal chemotactic cell. Sci. Adv. 11, eadx9364 (2025). 
85. Esteban, J. A., Salas, M. & Blanco, L. Fidelity of phi 29 DNA polymerase. Comparison between 
protein-primed initiation and DNA polymerization. J. Biol. Chem. 268, 2719–2726 (1993). 
86. Lynch, M. Evolution of the mutation rate. Trends Genet. 26, 345–352 (2010). 
87. Adamala, K. P. et al. Confronting risks of mirror life. Science (2024) doi:10.1126/science.ads9158. 
88. Odermatt, P. D. et al. Overlapping and essential roles for molecular and mechanical mechanisms in 
mycobacterial cell division. Nat. Phys. 16, 57–62 (2020). 
89. Maxwell, C. S., Jacobsen, T., Marshall, R., Noireaux, V. & Beisel, C. L. A detailed cell-free 
transcription-translation-based assay to decipher CRISPR protospacer-adjacent motifs. Methods 
143, 48–57 (2018). 
 
  
Supplementary Information 
 
for  
 
Minimal cell with 90kbp genome undergoing cell cycle, replication, and selection 
 
by 
 
Nathaniel J. Gaut, Christopher Deich, Brock Cash, Tanner Hoog, Aaron E. Engelhart, Katarzyna P. 
Adamala 
 
Correspondence to: kadamala@umn.edu  
 
 
 
 
Table of content of supplementary information 
Supplementary Text  
Supplementary Figures  
Supplementary Tables  
Supplementary References  
 
  
Supplementary text 
 
Table of content of Supplementary text section 
1. His tag mediated liposome fusion leads to growth 
2. The Generation Counter 
3. mRNA and protein abundance during cell cycle 
4. Synthetic cell culture media 
5. Genetically encoded division using FLAG system 
6. Fusion system efficiency across multiple generations and between cells 
7. The multi-partite genome 
8. The translation system cytoplasm of synthetic cells 
9. The limitations and ways forward 
 
Note on translation systems used: 
The only part of the main figure results done with TxTl was data on figure 2, the experiments described 
in SI text sections 1 and 3 and accompanying SI figures. All other results, shown on main figures 3, 4, 5 
and 6 and corresponding SI figures, were done using PURE translation system.  
 
1. His tag mediated liposome fusion leads to growth  
This supplementary text section has information related to section “Genetically encoded liposome fusion 
leads to growth” of the main paper results, and data on Figure 2.  
The major compositional difference between the peptide and nucleic acid fusion systems implies that 
any mechanism that can increase binding affinity of the liposome leaflets will induce membrane fusion. 
We decided to use another well characterized molecular interaction system to bring two liposomes 
together, the Ni-NTA interaction with a His tag. We hypothesized that if one population of synthetic cell 
liposomes contains Ni-NTA lipids, and the other population of liposomes is decorated with histidine tags, 
the Ni-NTA/His tag interaction will bring the outer leaflets of liposomes together, initiating fusion.  
To verify that theory, we prepared a VAMP2-His fusion peptide based on the previously used VAMP2 
SNARE mimic fusion system75. The VAMP2 transmembrane region was synthesized with a 6xHis tag on 
the N terminus (Methods section 8), and a population of liposomes was decorated with this VAMP2-His 
protein.  
The initial ratio of protein to lipid was 1 to 500 with 1mM liposomes carrying 2µM VAMP2-His. Another 
population of liposomes was decorated with 18:1 DGS-Ni-NTA lipid at an initial concentration of 0.2 
mol%. The VAMP liposomes contain T7 RNA polymerase and a complete TxTl reaction mix, while the Ni-
NTA liposomes contain a plasmid encoding GFP under the control of a T7 promoter and a TxTl reaction 
mix without T7 RNA polymerase.  
This design is such that GFP is expressed only if the lumens of those two liposome populations combine 
(so the GFP plasmid from one liposome population can be transcribed by T7 RNAP from the other 
population). The membrane of the VAMP liposomes is labelled with a pair of FRET dyes (Cy5 and Cy7) to 
follow membrane growth. This red-shifted FRET pair (instead of NBD – rhodamine commonly used in 
liposome growth experiments) was chosen to allow for the monitoring of membrane growth via FRET 
without spectral interference from the GFP expression used to track lumen mixing. The schematic of 
that experiment is on Figure S17. 
In all experiments, we mixed an equal amount of both liposome populations, incubated for 12 hours at 
30°C, and then recorded the fluorescence of GFP and Cy5. Higher GFP fluorescence indicates more 
lumen mixing, while higher Cy5 fluorescence indicates more membrane mixing (since Cy5 is the FRET 
donor, and diluting the FRET lipids in the newly mixed membrane increases donor fluorescence, while 
decreasing the acceptor fluorescence, see Figure S14). 
Upon mixing the liposomes at initial concentrations of 0.2mol% of peptide to lipid and 0.2mol% of Ni-
NTA to lipid, we observed GFP production and FRET signal indicating membrane mixing. Encouraged by 
those results, we investigated both VAMP and Ni-NTA concentration in their respective membranes. 
Those experiments revealed that increasing peptide concentration results in more liposome fusion, 
while increasing Ni-NTA concentration improves fusion only up to about 1mol% of Ni-NTA (higher than 
1mol% decreases the fusion efficiency). (Figure S17).  
We investigated the stability of liposomes with an increased amount of Ni-NTA by testing the retention 
of calcein, a small fluorescent dye, in liposomes prepared with varying amounts of Ni-NTA. The samples 
with a higher concentration of Ni-NTA showed an increase in leakage of calcein, independent of the 
concentration of the VAMP protein in the membrane (Figure S1). This indicates that at higher 
concentrations, the Ni-NTA causes a decrease in the stability of liposomes, despite improved fusion 
performance. Overall, the VAMP-His results indicate that the His tag and Ni-NTA lipid pair can be used to 
induce effective fusion of synthetic cell liposomes. 
Encouraged by those results, we proceeded to engineering a fusion system that relied on a protein 
expressed inside synthetic cells, instead of a protein added from the outside after liposome formation. 
While the VAMP-His fusion could be synthesized inside synthetic cell liposome, that protein doesn’t 
translocate across the membrane. Therefore, it would be difficult to design a VAMP based mechanism 
that would couple protein expression inside the synthetic cell with the His tag displayed on the outer 
membrane. To achieve the coupling of gene expression with membrane tag display, we used 
modification of αHL membrane protein.  
After characterizing the αHL based fusion system (see main results section “Genetically encoded 
liposome fusion leads to growth”), we confirmed that the αHL can also be synthesized outside of 
synthetic cells. The αHL protein has two His tags, C-terminal tag and a tag in the trans-membrane loop, 
so there should be a His tag presented on either side of the membrane.  
We set up fusion experiments with one population of synthetic cells carrying T7RNAP, and the other 
population carrying GFP plasmid and Ni-NTA tags, but this time the external solution also contained 
complete TxTl reaction and αHL plasmid. The fusion experiments were performed, testing different 
amount of αHL plasmid and different amount of Ni-NTA lipid tags (Figure S20). Both GFP monitored 
lumen fusion and Cy5 FRET monitored membrane mixing results show that fusion is dependent on both 
αHL concentration and the concentration of Ni-NTA lipid tag. The results show similar trends to the 
fusion results with αHL expressed inside the synthetic cell (Figure 2b and 2c).  
 
2. The Generation Counter  
This supplementary text section has information related to section “Five generations of synthetic cell 
cycle” of the main paper results, and data on Figure 3.  
Demonstrating synthetic cells successfully undergo all five cycles of feeding, growth, and division, is 
critical to demonstrating a full cell cycle. In previous work on multiple rounds of synthetic cell fusion, we 
demonstrated that particular cell participated in all fusion events using a complex, multicomponent 
genetic circuit. That circuit only produced a protein readout if all 10 genes from 9 fusion events were 
present34. Those previous results made us optimistic about the possibility of achieving fusion levels 
adequate to create a continuous lineage. However, the use of a multi-component reporter pathway was 
not practical in the cell cycle system. We needed a simpler generation counter. We also rejected any 
DNA-based designs, to avoid interference with the Phi29 gene replication, discussed in detail later.  
We chose an RNA design based on short double stranded RNA oligos with overlapping “sticky ends” 
(Figure S45). The oligos are ligated by a T4 RNA ligase, demonstrated previously to be capable of ligating 
the “sticky ends” of RNA80. The design of overlapping overhangs ensures that the oligos can only ligate in 
one order, producing a specific ligation product only if all generation counter oligo pairs are present 
(Table S3). The ligation products are detected in an RT qPCR reaction, with the RT primers designed to 
bind at the end of the third, fourth, or fifth generation oligo product. Generation one and two primers 
were not used because the product would be too short for the primers to bind without overlap, and too 
small for efficient qPCR detection. Based on which primers are used (Gen3, 4, or 5), the RT qPCR analysis 
detects if the generation counter RNA underwent at least that number of ligation events, and thus can 
determine if the product is the result of at least that many generations. For example, if the generation 
four (Gen4) primer is used, a product will be detected if four or five fragments were ligated (the product 
of five ligations also contains the product of four ligations, and so the Gen4 primer will also bind the 
generation five product) (Figure S45).  
We first tested the proof of principle of the generation counter, demonstrating that the full-length 
ligation product can be detected only if all 10 fragments are present. The “top” and “bottom” single 
stranded oligonucleotides are used to make each double stranded oligos for five generations, for a total 
of 10 RNA oligonucleotides (Figure S46). RT qPCR was performed with Gen5 primers to detect the full-
length product. We present the data as fluorescence from the qPCR reaction at round 20 instead of 
typical Cq values, because samples missing one oligonucleotide lack Cq callouts. We find that showing 
raw fluorescence is more informative than showing results of 0 for most samples. Only samples where 
all oligos were present produced measurable qPCR signal, indicating that no product is made unless all 
10 oligos (counters for all 5 generations) are present. (Figure S46) 
Next, we tested the generation counter in liposome fusion experiments. We used two populations of 
liposomes, with one fusion event instead of five, to first test the generation counter ligation 
independently from the efficiency of multiple fusion events. One population carried the T4 RNA ligase 
and the bottom oligos for all five generation counter pairs, while the other population carried the top 
strand oligos for one, two, three, four, or five generations. Negative controls included a population with 
no top strands and one with all top strands but no liposome fusion. All samples were also labeled with 
an NBD – Rhodamine FRET pair, as an independent means to verify membrane fusion. NBD is the donor 
in the NBD – Rhodamine FRET pair, so successful membrane mixing is indicated by an increase in NBD 
fluorescence, and a decrease in FRET (Figure S14). In all samples where liposome fusion occurred, NBD 
fluorescence was higher, indicating membrane mixing, while NBD fluorescence remained low in the no 
fusion control sample (Figure S47). After NBD fluorescence was measured, samples were processed for 
RT qPCR generation counter analysis. Each sample was used for three RT reactions, with primers for 
generation three, generation four, or generation five (Gen3, Gen4 and Gen5). The qPCR analysis showed 
no detectable generation counter fusion product in the samples with: no top oligos, no fusion, and in 
samples with top oligos for only one or two generations. The generation three primer detected ligation 
product in samples with top oligos for gen 1, 2 and 3 (as well as samples with the oligos for gen 4 and 5). 
Similarly, the generation four primer detected product in samples with top oligos for generations one 
through four, and in samples with the top oligos for all five generations. The generation five primer only 
detected ligation product in samples with all five generation top oligos (Figure S47). Those results are 
consistent with the design of the generation counter, and demonstrate that our generation counter can 
be used to detect up to five liposome fusion events (a.k.a. generations). Thus, we developed a 
generation counter, to confirm the presence of daughter cells that underwent all cycles of growth and 
division (as opposed to cells that skipped one or more cycles of feeding).  
Herein, we will use the term “generation” to refer to a single cycle of cell growth, followed by incubation 
and division.  
 
3. mRNA and protein abundance during cell cycle  
This supplementary text section has information related to section “Five generations of synthetic cell 
cycle” of the main paper results, and data on Figure 3.  
The abundance of mRNA did not significantly correlate with the presence or absence of Phi29 or fusion. 
Both GFP and αHL mRNA were detected in all samples (Figure 3b, f, j). We speculate that the mRNA 
abundance was influenced by a few factors that might have opposing effects. Feeding is expected to 
increase mRNA abundance, by providing more substrate for transcription; however, the Phi29 might 
have a negative effect on mRNA abundance, by decreasing RNA polymerase access to the DNA template 
(since T7RNAP and Phi29 compete for DNA occupancy). At the same time, Phi29 replication might also 
have a positive effect on mRNA abundance, by increasing the total DNA available for transcription. 
Future work on characterizing this cell cycle might help elucidate those emergent regulatory 
mechanisms.  
GFP fluorescence presented clearer trends: in samples with DNA replication and feeding, GFP expression 
increases throughout subsequent generations. In samples with feeding and growth but no genome 
replication, and in samples without feeding but with genome replication, the GFP expression levels 
remain similar throughout the experiment (Figure 3d, h, l). This might indicate that our speculative 
interpretation of mRNA abundance data was correct; feeding and Phi29 replication have both positive 
and negative effects on mRNA abundance and corresponding protein expression. The GFP expression in 
samples without Phi29 and without feeding (i.e., no growth and no genome replication) was significantly 
lower than in all other cases. While this mechanism will require further detailed studies, it might provide 
an unexpected self-regulating benefit for engineering of a synthetic cell cycle with larger and more 
complex genomes.  
 
4. Synthetic cell culture media 
This supplementary text section has information related to section “Five generations of synthetic cell 
cycle” of the main paper results, and data on Figure 3.  
The presence of αHL, while necessary for liposome growth in our system, also causes leakage of 
synthetic cell components. We tested varying compositions of the external buffer, optimizing the 
concentrations of amino acids, salts, and energy molecules for gene expression in synthetic cells with 
αHL channels (Figure S15).  
In all experiments, 1mM of total lipids synthetic cell liposomes were prepared with 3 nM of both GFP 
and αHL plasmids. The internal solution was the standard 1x TxTl mix, as described in Methods section 
10, and the external solution was prepared as indicated on the figure, with varying amounts of salt, 
amino acid mix, and energy mix.  
All GFP expression values were compared to a negative control experiment with an mCherry plasmid in 
place of the αHL plasmid, to preserve the multi-plasmid metabolic load on the system. The highest 
single increase in GFP expression was from an increased energy mix concentration; however, increasing 
any component of the external mixture resulted in increased GFP expression. Samples with a 
concentration of any one or more of the tested components below the 1x value for standard TxTl, 
resulted in less GFP expression than a control sample kept at 1x TxTl via the absence of αHL channels 
(Figure S15). 
Overall, keeping the external solution of synthetic cell culture medium, at small molecule concentrations 
equal to the standard concentration for the protein expression reaction (1x), results in the best 
performance of the synthetic cell translation system in the presence of αHL membrane channels. 
Nutrient uptake and waste removal: The αHL is a non-specific membrane pore, allowing passage of all 
molecules under its molecular weight size cut-off. The equilibration through the channel is 
concentration gradient driven, it’s not active or selective transport. For that reason, the channel serves 
both for nutrient uptake and for removal of waste products, equilibrating the small molecules from the 
inside of the synthetic cell with the outside buffer. The volume of the outside buffer is significantly 
larger than the volume of the lumen of the cells.  
 
5. Genetically encoded division using FLAG system 
This supplementary text section has information related to section “Genetically encoded division” of the 
main paper results, and data on Figure 6.  
The genetically encoded growth requires small fusogenic tag that can be embedded in the feeder 
liposomes, to facilitate their fusion with the synthetic cell. His tag with its small molecule binding 
partner of Ni-NTA is the only system we know that fits all required parameters: a small, not terminal 
peptide tag (so it can be incorporated in trans-membrane loop of αHL and presented on the surface of 
synthetic cells), and a small binding partner (nickel NTA complex) that can be embedded in the 
membrane of feeder liposomes by lipid conjugation. All other peptide-based interactions require at least 
one of the binding partners to be significantly larger. Based on our experience with different fusogenic 
peptide systems, large binding partner would inhibit fusion of lipids. Therefore, we concluded that His 
tag system is the only currently available system for genetically encoded uptake of feeder liposomes in 
our system.  
To combine genetically encoded growth with genetically encoded division, we needed to engineer 
another system for immobilizing the division inducing large protein on the surface of synthetic cells (to 
keep the His tag free to facilitate fusion with feeder liposomes). We chose a FLAG tag, with its binding 
partner of FLAG antibody. FLAG tag antibody would likely be too big to induce membrane fusion, but 
since for division the goal is to attach a large protein to the surface of the liposomes anyway, we 
speculated that FLAG antibody mediated streptavidin attachment will be effective in inducing division. 
The results are similar to the His system, as demonstrated by DLS measurements (Figure 6c). We also 
confirmed division in the bead immobilization division experiments, similar to the His system tests 
shown on Figure 6f and 6g. Synthetic cells expressing 10nM αHL FLAG plasmid were prepared in the 
same way as for the His αHL division experiments, immobilizing the cells on magnetic beads with click 
chemistry. Streptavidin and biotin conjugated anti-FLAG antibody were added to the cells to induce 
division (see methods section 22). After 12h incubation, cells still attached to beads were separated 
from “daughter” cells free off the beads, and both fractions were analyzed for the presence of αHL DNA.  
The αHL DNA was detected, as expected, in all samples of cells still attached to beads that had αHL to 
begin with (Figure S70 panel c). In the free off the beads “daughter cell” fractions, αHL DNA was 
detected only in the sample with all elements necessary for division (αHL, streptavidin and biotin 
conjugated FLAG antibody linker). This confirmed that only if the cells divide, the daughter cells can 
detach from the beads. The amount of αHL DNA detected in daughter cells free off the beads is similar 
in the His division scheme (Figure 6f) and in the FLAG tag division scheme (Figure S70 panel b). This 
confirmed that FLAG tag division scheme works with similar efficiency as the His tag division scheme.  
Next, we tested the FLAG based division system in a competitive division scenario. Similarly to 
experiments with the His tag based division: two populations of synthetic cells were mixed. Synthetic 
cells containing FLAG tagged αHL under “slow” promoter T7 and FLAG tagged αHL under “fast” 
promoter T7Max were dividing in the same reaction. After division, we collected the “daughter” cells 
free off beads and the “parent” cells remaining attached to beads. Both fractions were analyzed for the 
presence of a unique DNA marker (see methods section 21) indicating presence of either 7T population 
or the T7Max population. The αHL DNA was detected, as expected, in all “parent” samples still attached 
to the beads that initially contained either T7 or T7Max cells, or both (Figure S70 panel E).  
In the samples free off the beads, the “daughter” fractions, αHL DNA was only detected if the division 
occurred (Figure S70 panel d). Similarly to the results of His tag-based division competition (Figure 6g 
and 6h), in the FLAG tag-based division experiments the cells with T7Max αHL produced more 
detectable “daughter cells” – as expected, the faster T7Max population divided more.  
Those tests confirmed that FLAG tag based genetically encoded division system is as viable as the His 
tagged based system. Having two different tags, His and FLAG, enabled us engineering of synthetic cells 
capable of genetically encoded feeding, growth and division. The feeding and growth system used the 
His tag with Ni-NTA linker, and the division system used the FLAG tag with biotin conjugated FLAG 
antibody linker.   
 
 
 
The His and the FLAG division systems do not interfere with each other 
The His division tag doesn’t interfere with FLAG based division, and the FLAG division tag doesn’t 
interfere with the His based division. We tested two things: cross-reactivity of the tags, and interference 
of the opposite system tag with division. All results are on Figure S74. 
To test cross-reactivity, we tested whether cells with αHL-FLAG can undergo division in presence of Ni-
NTA linker (no division was observed), and whether cells with αHL-His can undergo division in presence 
of biotin FLAG antibody linker (also no division was observed).  
Then, we tested whether adding the tag of the opposite division system to a matching pair (so adding 
biotin FLAG antibody linker to system containing αHL-His and Ni-NTA linker, and adding Ni-NTA linker to 
a system containing αHL-FLAG and biotin FLAG antibody linker) would inhibit division. No interference 
was noted.  
 
6. Fusion system efficiency across multiple generations and between cells 
This supplementary text section has information related to Ni-NTA His tag fusion system used through 
this paper.  
Fusion across multiple generations: 
In each experiment of the multi-generational cell cycle, the αHL concentration is renewed through 
protein expression, while the Ni-NTA linker concentration is renewed by tags coming in with each 
portion of feeder liposomes. Therefore, we speculated the efficiency of the fusion after each generation 
will only be affected by the concentration of αHL plasmid (how many copies of αHL make it into each 
daughter cell generation). To test this, we set up a fusion efficiency testing experiment similar to the 
schematic described on Figure 2a, but this time the GFP plasmid was brought in only in feeder liposomes 
during one generation. The starting synthetic cells contained T7 RNA polymerase and TxTl machinery 
expressing αHL. Generation of growth and division experiments were performed, as described on Figure 
3 and in Methods section 11. The “feeder vesicles” were being added, containing all metabolites as 
described in Methods section 11, except no generation counter oligos were used here. Instead of 
generation counter oligo system, we used GFP reconstitution: at one of the generations, the feeder 
vesicles bring in GFP plasmid under the control of a T7 promoter. After fusion, the T7 RNA polymerase 
from the synthetic cells enables transcription and expression of GFP from a plasmid brought in by feeder 
liposome.  
As we demonstrated during optimization of the fusion system (data presented on Figure 2 and 
accompanying supporting materials), the fusion efficiency correlates with the GFP expression yield. 
Since in the experiments described here the GFP plasmid is brought in by feeder liposomes, quantifying 
GFP expression after 12h incubation following the addition of feeder liposomes allows us to estimate 
fusion efficiency. However, comparing GFP expression directly between generations was not 
informative, because after each generation of growth and division the total amount of cells in the 
sample increases, so more total protein can be made.  
To ensure that GFP expression values are correlated with efficiency of fusion, we needed to normalize 
cell density in the samples before fusion. To do that, we used a membrane dye. All samples (starting 
synthetic cells, and all feeder liposomes in generations leading to the experiment) contained 0.01mol% 
Rhodamine dye. First, samples were dialyzed to remove previous generations feeder liposomes (see 
Methods section 24). Then, samples were normalized to equal Rhodamine fluorescent value per volume 
(10uL sample at 5000 RFU). Then, feeder vesicles with GFP plasmid were added, samples were 
incubated for 12h and GFP fluorescence was measured. Since starting concentrations of synthetic cells 
was the same regardless of which generation the experiment was performed at, the resulting GFP signal 
from the sample can be directly compared, to indicate fusion efficiency. 
Results are presented on Figure S36. The data indicates that, as expected based on previous αHL 
titrations, fusion efficiency somewhat decreases with each generation. This is most likely because it 
correlates with αHL plasmid abundance. As indicated on Figure 3p, αHL plasmid is in 71% cells analyzed 
after 5 generations, making it the most abundant plasmid. Both the GFP fusion efficiency data described 
here, and plasmid abundance data presented earlier, can be explained by this correlation of αHL 
abundance with fusion efficiency: the plasmid that is responsible for fusion efficiency will have highest 
likelihood of persisting through the generations, because the daughter cells which lost αHL will have 
lower chance of growing in the next round (some αHL protein will persist in the membrane, so fusion is 
not expected to completely stop, and some αHL mRNA is likely to persist even if the daughter cell did 
not receive the αHL plasmid).  
Fusion between different cells: 
A separate issue potentially affecting fusion efficiency is the possibility of fusion between two different 
synthetic cells – as Ni-NTA tags accumulate during the feeding events. This is distinct from the desirable 
fusion between a synthetic cell and feeding vesicles.  
To test that, we prepared two populations of synthetic cells, and carried out 5 generations of growth 
and division. The cells contained a genome comprised of T7RNAP, αHL. One population of cells carried 
GFP plasmid under control of T3 RNA polymerase promoter, while the other population contained T3 
RNA polymerase gene under control of T7 promoter. The cells containing T3 plasmid were expressing T3 
RNAP during each incubation step (because they contained T7 RNAP needed to express the T3 RNAP), 
while the cells that contained GFP plasmid under T3 promoter were unable to express the GFP. 
Expression of GFP was only possible if the cells containing T3 RNAP fused with cells containing the GFP 
plasmid. This is analogous to previously described T7 / GFP plasmid fusion experiments. The T3 
promoter / polymerase pair was used here because the T7RNAP was already used for αHL expression (so 
it would not have been omitted from one population of cells). 
The two populations of synthetic cells (one carrying T3RNAP and one carrying GFP plasmid under T3 
promoter) were mixed at the start of the experiment, and generations of growth and division 
experiments were performed as described earlier. After each generation, GFP fluorescence was 
measured, to monitor possible fusion between synthetic cells (not fusion between synthetic cell and 
feeder liposome).  
The results are shown on Figure S38, along with positive control of GFP fluorescence from GFP under T7 
RNAP in synthetic cells that did undergo all 5 cycles of growth and division. 
 
7. The multi-part genome 
This supplementary text section discusses the design of the multi-plasmid genome.  
In this work, we chose to encode the entire genome of the synthetic cell on several plasmids, rather 
than constructing one megaplasmid containing all genes. At first, this decision was driven by practical 
consideration: designing the cell cycle, we did not know which genes will result in the best performance. 
Optimizing each element separately was easier when key genes were encoded on smaller plasmids.  
After completing the cell cycle experiments, we considered the merits of encoding the entire genome on 
a single plasmid, but we decided to keep it split between multiple smaller plasmids for both practical 
and biological considerations. For future engineering of this system, it will be practically easier to modify 
specific genes, to add or remove components, when the genome remains split. The biological reason for 
keeping it on independent plasmids is the consideration for partition into daughter cells during division. 
The fact that genes are divided into multiple, physically separate plasmids, limits the possible influence 
of stochastic inequalities in plasmid partitioning among daughter cells. Since the gene is encoded on 
multiple plasmids, and each gene is present at relatively low copy number in each cell (see Table S8), 
during division it is more likely that at least some daughter cells receive at least one copy of each 
plasmid. If the entire genome was on single plasmid, any accidental fluctuation in genome concentration 
within the grown cell would potentially have more serious effect on the copy number of all genes in 
each daughter cell. We speculate that as synthetic cell systems mature and develop further, including 
development of cytoskeleton (see discussion in section below, Limitations and way forward), the 
genome will eventually be placed on single large plasmid (aka chromosome). For now, as this is the first 
demonstration of a complete cell cycle and genetically encoded division, we think more optimization 
and engineering will be needed to build up robustness of this system. Such engineering will be easier if 
the genome remains split between multiple plasmids.  
The timing of genome replication and division: In the absence of complex cell cycle control checkpoints, 
the Phi29 polymerase is active all the time. In the cell cycle with mechanical division, the DNA replication 
occurs during the incubation time before each division step. In the cells with genetically encoded 
division, once the streptavidin and division tag (the biotin FLAG antibody linker or the Ni-NTA linker) are 
added, the division process can begin, and it continues unless tags are removed. In that system the DNA 
replication occurs concurrently with cell division. In both cases, the daughter cells have been shown to 
contain newly synthesized DNA (separated from the original DNA used to make first generation of 
synthetic cells by DpnI digest, see methods section 11).  
The quantification of newly synthesized DNA in daughter cells after cell cycle with mechanical division is 
shown on Figure 3, 5, S25, S28, and S32 and S33. The quantification of newly synthesized DNA in 
daughter cells after genetically encoded division is shown on Figure 6, S67, S69, S71, and S72. 
The limitations of genome replication: This work uses Phi29 DNA polymerase for replicating of the 
synthetic cell genome. The advantages of that enzyme are isothermal reaction conditions, activity at the 
temperature compatible with protein expression, and the fact that active Phi29 enzyme can be 
expressed in vitro (there are no modifications or folding chaperones necessary for activity). However, 
there are several limitations of this system, including the strand displacement activity, and limited ability 
to replicate large haploid genomes. In this work, Phi29 was good enough to replicate the relatively small 
(by the standards of living organisms) multi-partite synthetic genome, but more work is needed to 
improve synthetic genome replication. To achieve greater robustness of a fully autonomous synthetic 
cell, a different, better genome replication system will need to be engineered.  
All plasmids are transcribed: The qPCR analysis indicates presence of mRNA from all genes on each 
plasmid of the multi-partite genome, indicating that all genes (each having its own promoter) are 
transcribed after 5 generations of cell cycle with growth and division. Results for mRNA abundance for 
some genes are on Figure 3, and qualitative measurement of presence of all other genes is on Figure 
S44. 
All genes are replicated: We quantified all individual genes from the multi-partite genome after 5 
generations of growth and division. Data on Figure 3 and Figure S28 shows that under conditions 
enabling genome replication (with Phi29 present), newly synthesized DNA for all genes is detected. 
Individual data points for that figure are on Figure S29.  
Each plasmid is partitioned into daughter cells: Single cell analysis measured abundance of each 
plasmid after 5 generations of growth and division. Figure S32 shows abundance of each plasmid in each 
of the 95 single cell experiments, demonstrating that each plasmid is present in significant number of 
daughter cells after 5 generations. Summary of that data, showing count by plasmid, is on Figure S33. 
The limitations of incomplete partitioning into daughter cells: As shown in data on figures discussed in 
the paragraph above, not all daughter cells receive full complement of plasmids. This is the main 
limitation of multi-part genome, one that will hopefully be solved after the genome is optimized and 
placed on single chromosome. We notice an interesting, although not entirely unexpected pattern: 
pLD1, pLD2, pLD3 and GFP plasmids are lost at highest rates, while αHL, T7RNAP and pREP are more 
retained. This could be explained by the relative necessity of those plasmids. Since feeder liposomes 
bring fresh ribosomes, and GFP has no role in feeding process, losing those plasmids would not affect 
feeding and mechanical division. Losing membrane channel, RNA polymerase, or DNA polymerase, 
would probably affect the cell’s ability to grow and express proteins more significantly. However, 
because PURE system of our synthetic cells has no protein degradation machinery, it is possible the loss 
of those plasmids in later generations, when the proteins already had a chance to accumulate, might 
have less detrimental effect. 
 
8. The translation system cytoplasm of synthetic cells 
This supplementary text section discusses cell-free translation systems used in this work.  
In engineering liposome encapsulated synthetic cells, the most commonly used liposome lumen 
solution, a.k.a. the synthetic cell cytoplasm, is a cell-free translation system. Two of such systems are 
used in this work: the whole-cell lysate TxTl, and the PURE system.  
Both TxTl and PURE contain natural ribosomes purified from E. coli, together with translation system 
components like acyltransferases, EF-Tu, and tRNAs. All those components are isolated from E. coli.  
There are three major differences between TxTl and PURE that were relevant to work presented here: 
the efficiency, compatibility with genome replication, and the trackability of composition. The TxTl has 
significantly higher yield than PURE, providing more protein in shorter amount of time, and it is more 
economical to use. The PURE system, despite lower yields, was used in most experiments presented in 
this paper, because it is the only translation system currently compatible with genome replication via 
the Phi29 polymerase system.18,20 The PURE system is also the only translation system with a chemically 
defined composition - all elements of PURE, including proteins, RNA, and small molecules, are separately 
purified and combined for the reaction.  
In a typical protein expression experiment inside synthetic cells used in this work, the expression starts 
with DNA template transcription via T7 RNA polymerase. The mRNA created in this transcription is 
immediately used in translation, since our system does not include mRNA splicing and maturation.  
Whole-cell lysate TxTl is used on Figure 2 for testing and optimization of the genetically encoded fusion 
system. We used TxTl to originally optimize the feeding system, since the yields of TxTl reactions are 
higher and costs of those reactions are lower.  
The modified PURE system is used in cell cycle, competition, selection and growth experiments, 
including Figure 3, 4, 5 and 6. The PURE system used in this was included some buffer and solutions 
modifications, described in Methods section 2, pREP reaction. Those modifications, first described in the 
work using Phi29 to replicate genome in PURE20, were necessary to couple transcription, translation and 
Phi29 mediated genome replication. We are grateful to prof. Hannes Mutschler and dr. Kai Libicher for 
their generous advice on following their modified PURE protocol necessary for Phi29 reactions.  
 
 
9. The limitations and ways forward 
This supplementary text section expands on the conclusions of the main paper.  
In this work, we present a chemical system made from non-living components, capable of feeding, 
growth, selection and division. While recognizing this is a significant step forward in the quest to 
generate living systems from non-living components, we also recognize that significant work remains 
before synthetic cells are capable of robust independent life and evolution. Below we list the major 
constraints of the system presented in this paper, and we suggest possible next steps to engineer 
around or away from those constraints.  
 
Cellular organization:  
All natural life has some means of segregating the content of cytoplasm, and most also has means to 
impart structure into the membrane. This is usually done by cytoskeleton and organelles (including 
membraneless organelles and cytoplasmic domains). Synthetic cells presented here have no such spatial 
organization aids. Despite that, we have confirmed that after 5 generations of cell cycle, a significant 
portion of synthetic cells still contain all 7 plasmids from the 90kbp genome (Figure 3o and Figure 3p).  
Future work on this system is needed to investigate genome distribution after the genetically encoded 
division. We confirmed that all plasmids make it to the daughter cell fraction (Figure 6R), unfortunately 
relatively low yields of this division mechanism make it difficult to investigate with more granularity.  
The abundance of each individual gene in the sample after 5 generations is on Figure S28, abundance of 
each plasmid in single cells is on Figure S32, count of cells expressing GFP after each cycle is on Figure 
S30, and abundance of full length generation counter oligo in single cells after each generation is on 
Figure S37. 
To achieve more robust, continuous multi-generational replication, the cell cycle and division 
mechanisms will need to be expanded, to include segregation of cytoplasmic components and the 
genome. Synthetic cell engineering already provides many technologies that can be utilized for this 
purpose. There has been a lot of progress in engineering synthetic cell cytoskeleton40,42, and in building 
intracellular structures like membraneless organelles81–83. Those tools can be used to segregate 
genomes into daughter cells, and to ensure proportional distribution of ribosomes and other 
cytoplasmic components.  
Interestingly, while cytoskeleton has been considered essential to replication, partitioning of cellular 
components, and cell motility, a recent report demonstrates that synthetic cells can achieve chemotaxis, 
a simple example of motility, without functioning cytoskeleton. 84 While this report is not directly related 
to the work presented in this paper, it provides interesting evidence that a key cellular function can be 
realized by means other than mimicking a natural system. 
 
Regeneration of metabolism:  
It has recently been demonstrated that a PURE system is capable of reconstituting a functional 
ribosome56, and regeneration of metabolic components55. Synthetic cells presented in this work have 
genome containing the proteins necessary to build a translation system (the pLD1, pLD2 and pLD3 
plasmids), but we still deliver ribosomes and other elements of the pREP reaction in the feeder 
liposomes. Those cells are also perfect heterotrophs, with all small molecule substrates being delivered 
from outside media and via feeding. More work is required to engineer a robust synthetic cell 
metabolism, capable of self-regeneration of all key enzymes.  
 
Mutagenesis:  
Phi29 has reported mutation rates on the order of 106.85 In the previous mutation studies, the enzyme is 
named ‘phi 29 DNA polymerase’, while in this work we use the name Phi29. To the best of our 
knowledge, it is the same enzyme.  
It has been demonstrated that synthetic cells can undergo Darwinian evolution using Phi29 66. In a 
genome of the size comparable to the one used in our work, for simplicity assuming 100kbp, Phi29 
would statistically make one error for every 10 complete replications of the whole genome. While this 
high-fidelity replication exceeds the fidelity of that found in natural cells by 1-2 orders of magnitude86, 
over enough replication cycles and generations, beneficial mutations could arise and affect the 
phenotype.  
In this work, we introduced mutations artificially, preparing synthetic cells with slow T7 or fast T7Max 
promoter. While this enabled selection, but not Darwinian evolution – the latter would require that the 
mutations arise within the cells. More work is needed to engineer this system with built-in evolvability, 
to enable nature to take over from our curated pool of mutations. There are no mutation repair 
mechanisms, so most of the spontaneous mutations in promoters and protein coding sequences will 
likely be lethal to the synthetic cell. However, this might actually be beneficial in the early stages of 
exploring evolvability of synthetic life. Additionally, synthetic cells contain multiple copies of each gene – 
they are, using biological term, polyploids.  
 
Control mechanisms:  
Gene expression in synthetic cells is not controlled by any sophisticated mechanism. Like in most in vitro 
translation systems, gene expression level depends on the strength of the promoter and the copy 
number of each gene. For more complex behaviors and robust metabolic resource management, gene 
expression control mechanisms need to be implemented. Regulation of copy number of genes after 
replication will also be needed for synthetic cells dividing continuously over unlimited number of 
generations.  
 
Biosafety and Biosecurity:  
Engineering living synthetic cells provides many opportunities to challenge the existing biosafety 
frameworks, and potentially also creates novel biosecurity hazards. While engineering any pathogenic 
biological system is, in theory, prohibited under the Biological Weapons Convention, international law 
remains poorly positioned to deal with regulating emerging fields like ours. The Cartagena Protocols, 
supplement to the Convention on Biological Diversity, would be better suited to cover this research. 
Unfortunately, two countries did not ratify the protocols (the United States and the Holy See), and one 
of those countries is a major center of synthetic cell engineering efforts. Recent conversations about one 
particular type of synthetic cells, the so-called mirror life of a synthetic cell with opposite 
stereochemistry87, highlights the needs of developing better regulatory framework for governing all 
synthetic cell technologies.  
The synthetic cell system presented in this paper is not robust enough to survive outside of perfect lab 
conditions. For one, the necessity of adding a large bulky protein and a specialized linker (in this work, 
streptavidin and either FLAG antibody or Ni-NTA biotin linker) is a nearly ideal auxotrophy: it is difficult 
to imagine those compounds being available in the environment. Therefore, even if synthetic cells 
replicating according to the mechanism presented here were to be accidentally or intentionally 
released, there is no plausible pathway for them to replicate outside of the experimental conditions. 
However, this project offers a significant milestone towards evolvability of synthetic cells, making it 
more likely that more robust, autonomous systems will be available soon. This highlights the urgent 
need to develop a safety and security framework for future synthetic cell engineering. 
 
The definition of life: 
Life is notoriously difficult to define exhaustively and unambiguously. A common question raised in the 
field of engineering live from non-living components is “How do we know we are done?” The trait most 
commonly listed as a key property of a living cell is self-replication. However, defining “self” in self-
replication remains elusive. One might point out that there is no life that truly is independent of 
environmental interventions. Synthetic cells engineered in this work need external supply of 
streptavidin for replication. Most living organisms need external intervention to produce offspring. 
Sometimes it’s chemical (as simple as abundance of food), astronomical (mating at specific time of the 
year), or a mechanical force (certain mycobacteria will divide if poked with a needle 88). One might also 
argue that if self-replication is a trait necessary for life, a human is no alive – none of us can self-
replicate. This highlights the inadequacy of all existing definitions.   
The authors of this paper are partial to a definition quoting Justice Potter Stewart, “I will know it when I 
see it”.  
  
Supplementary figures 
Each SI figure is labeled, in the upper right corner, with information about the section this data is related 
to.  
 
For quick reference and finding supplementary figures corresponding to each part of the project, below 
is a list of SI figures relevant to each main figure of this paper. 
Figure 2: SI figures 1-24  
Figure 3: SI figures 25-48,  
Figure 4: SI figures 49-56 
Figure 5: SI figures 57-62 
Figure 6: SI figures 63-74 
Calibration data for all parts of the project: SI figures 75 and 76 
 
Table of content of supplementary figures 
 
SI figure  Title Related to 
main figure 
Figure S1 
Small molecule leakage from liposomes with different NTA and VAMP2 
His peptide tag. Fig. 2 
Figure S2 Leakage after fusion of NTA lipids with VAMP2 His. Fig. S1 
Figure S3 Leakage test for double His labeled αHL fusion experiments. Fig. 2 
Figure S4 Leakage test for double His labeled αHL fusion. Fig. S3 
Figure S5 
FRET data for liposome fusion samples corresponding to the Western Blot 
analysis of αHL expression Fig. 2 
Figure S6 His labeled αHL fusion, GFP data. Fig. 2 
Figure S7 His labeled αHL fusion, Cy  FRET data.  Fig. 2 
Figure S8 Leakage test for NTA lipids.  Fig. 2 
Figure S9 Test leakage for αHL expression.  Fig. 2 
Figure S10 Leakage test for NTA lipids. Fig. S8 
Figure S11 Test leakage for αHL expression. Fig. S9 
Figure S12 Liposome fusion testing at different liposome ratios. Fig. 2 
Figure S13 
GFP DNA and mRNA after genetically encoded lumen mixing of synthetic 
cells Fig. 2 
Figure S14 General scheme for liposome FRET size measurement.  Fig. 2 
Figure S15 Optimization of synthetic cell media Fig. 2 
Figure S16 Optimization of synthetic cell media. Fig. S15 
Figure S17 VAMP2-His fusion testing. Fig. 2 
Figure S18 VAMP2-His fusion testing, GFP. Fig. S17 
Figure S19 VAMP2-His fusion testing, Cy5. Fig. S17 
Figure S20 Fusion with αHL introduced externally. Fig. 2 
Figure S21 Fusion testing with external αHL, GFP signal. Fig. S20 
Figure S22 Fusion testing with external αHL, Cy  signal. Fig. S20 
Figure S23 Leakage test for His labeled αHL fusion experiments. Fig. S20 
Figure S24 Leakage test for αHL fusion experiments. Fig. S23 
Figure S25 Synthetic cells after 5 generations of growth and division with dialysis. Fig. 3 
Figure S26 Dialysis time course of removing “feeder” liposomes Fig. S25 
Figure S27 Generations of growth and division with dialysis.  Fig. S25 
Figure S28 All genes in 90kB synthetic cell genome after 5 generations of cell cycle. Fig. 3 
Figure S29 
Quantification of individual genes in the synthetic cell genome after 5 
generations of cell cycle. Fig. S28 
Figure S30 GFP fluorescence in synthetic cells Fig. 3 
Figure S31 
Fluorescence microscopy of synthetic cell samples, imaged after five 
generations Fig. 3 
Figure S32 Abundance of each plasmid after 5 generations of cell cycle. Fig. 3 
Figure S33 Summary of single cell analysis of abundance of each plasmid. Fig. S32 
Figure S34 Individual data points for 5 generations of growth and division. Fig. 3 
Figure S35 
Detection of component leakage from cells after 5 generations of growth 
and division Fig. 3 
Figure S36 Fusion efficiency across multiple generations Fig. 3 
Figure S37 Full length generation counter oligo after each generation Fig. 3 
Figure S38 Investigating fusion between synthetic cells Fig. 3 
Figure S39 Cell number changes during cell cycle and replication Fig. 3 
Figure S40 Cell cycle without fluorescent proteins Fig. 3 
Figure S41 Membrane stability in presence of fluorescent protein GFP Fig. 3 
Figure S42 Membrane stability in presence of fluorescent protein mCherry Fig. 3 
Figure S43 mRNA and protein time course Fig. 3 
Figure S44 Detection of mRNA for each gene after 5 generations of cell cycle Fig. 3 
Figure S45 The general scheme of the generation counter. Fig. 3 
Figure S46 Detection of the generation counter full-length product. Fig. S45 
Figure S47 Generation counter tests in fusion experiments. Fig. S45 
Figure S48 Optimizing the ratio of liposome populations and ligase enzyme. Fig. S47 
Figure S49 
Flow cytometry analysis of fusion reactions, with either T7 αHL or T7Max 
αHL plasmids. Fig. 4 
Figure S50 
Flow cytometry analysis of synthetic cells after 5 generations of growth 
and division. Fig. 4 
Figure S51 
Flow cytometry analysis of positive and negative control samples after 5 
generations of growth and division. Fig. 4 
Figure S52 Phi29 replication for T7 αHL and T7Max αHL plasmids. Fig. 4 
Figure S53 
Amplicon DNA isolated from samples of competing cells after 5 
generations. Fig. 4 
Figure S54 Example of analysis of NGS data. Fig. 4 
Figure S55 Selection experiments with normalized metabolic load. Fig. 4 
Figure S56 
Calibration curves for GFP and mCherry production after 5 generations of 
synthetic cell cycle.  Fig. 4 
Figure S57 Summary of the results of competitive growth Fig. 5 
Figure S58 
Number of cells containing GFP or mCherry plasmid during the 
subsequent generations of competition experiments Fig. 5 
Figure S59 
Abundance of GFP and mCherry plasmid in each individual cell after 
competitive growth experiments, with 1x feeder liposomes Fig. 5 
Figure S60 
Abundance of GFP and mCherry plasmid in each individual cell after 
competitive growth experiments, with 0.1x feeder liposomes Fig. 5 
Figure S61 Flow cytometry data from feeding competition experiments Fig. 5 
Figure S62 Fluorescence values for mCherry and GFP competitive feeding. Fig. 5 
Figure S63 Flow cytometry of synthetic cells before and after division Fig. 6 
Figure S64 
Size of synthetic cells after genetically encoded division using His tag 
system. Fig. 6 
Figure S65 
Size of synthetic cells after genetically encoded division using FLAG tag 
system Fig. 6 
Figure S66 
DNA abundance in synthetic cells after genetically encoded division on 
beads. Fig. 6 
Figure S67 
DNA abundance in synthetic cells after competitive genetically encoded 
division on beads. Fig. 6 
Figure S68 Individual data points for genetically encoded growth and division. Fig. 6 
Figure S69 
Detection of each plasmid in the synthetic cell genome after growth and 
division Fig. 6 
Figure S70 Genetically encoded division using FLAG system Fig. 6 
Figure S71 
DNA abundance in synthetic cells after genetically encoded division on 
beads with the FLAG tagged αHL Fig. S70 
Figure S72 
DNA abundance in synthetic cells after competitive genetically encoded 
division on beads with the FLAG tagged αHL Fig. S70 
Figure S73 
Fluorescent microscopy of synthetic cell undergoing a cycle of growth and 
division Fig. 6 
Figure S74 
Measuring interference and cross-reactivity of His and Flag based division 
systems Fig. 6 
Figure S75 Calibration curves for qPCR experiments.  
Figure S76 FRET calibration curves.  
  
Figure S1 
 
 
 
Figure S1. Small molecule leakage from liposomes with different NTA and VAMP2 His peptide tag. 
Leakage of small molecule calcein was tested in liposomes with NTA lipids and liposomes with VAMP2 
His peptide tag (labeled “protein”), after 12h incubation at  0°C. Liposomes contained 1mM calcein at 
the beginning of the experiment.  
The dots on top of the bar graphs indicate individual values of three replicates. Examples of individual 
purification plots for samples summarized on this figure are on Figure S2. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
supporting data for Figure 2, 
genetically encoded growth 
Figure S2 
 
 
Figure S2. Leakage after fusion of NTA lipids with VAMP2 His.  
Example plots from size exclusion chromatography purification after fusion of liposomes with NTA lipids 
and liposomes with VAMP2 His peptide tag (labeled “protein”), after 12h incubation at  0°C. Liposomes 
contained 1mM calcein at the beginning of the experiment.  
Each sample was analyzed using two fluorescent measurements: calcein channel and Cy5 channel (see 
Table S5 for wavelengths). The calcein channel traces indicate leakage of small molecule and the Cy5 
channel (Cy5 lipid dye 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-(Cyanine 5)) indicates which 
fractions contain liposomes. 
 
 
  
supporting data for Figure S1, 
genetically encoded growth 
liposomes 
free solutes 

Figure S3 
 
 
 
Figure S3. Leakage test for double His labeled αHL fusion experiments.  
Leakage of small molecule calcein was tested in liposomes with NTA lipids and liposomes with αHL, after 
12h incubation at 30°C. Liposomes contained 1mM calcein, and the complete translation mix, αHL and 
GFP plasmids, at the beginning of the experiment.  
Examples of individual purification plots for samples summarized on this figure are on Figure S4.  
Dots on top of the bar graphs indicate individual values of three replicates. 
 
 
 
  
supporting data for Figure 2, 
genetically encoded growth 
Figure S4 
 
 
Figure S4. Leakage test for double His labeled αHL fusion. 
Example plots from size exclusion chromatography purification of synthetic cell liposomes. Leakage of 
small molecule calcein was tested in liposomes with NTA lipids and liposomes with αHL, after 12h 
incubation at 30°C. Liposomes contained 1mM calcein at the beginning of the experiment. Summarized 
data for all samples are on Figure S3. 
Each sample was analyzed using two fluorescent measurements: calcein channel and Cy5 channel (see 
Table S5 for wavelengths). The calcein channel traces indicate leakage of small molecule and the Cy5 
channel (Cy5 lipid dye 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-(Cyanine 5)) indicates which 
fractions contain liposomes. 
This data was collected using TxTl. 
 
  
supporting data for Figure S3, 
genetically encoded growth 
liposomes 
free solutes 
Figure S5 
 
 
 
Figure S5. FRET data for liposome fusion samples corresponding to the Western Blot analysis of αHL 
expression in synthetic cell liposomes. 
Population 1 of liposomes were prepared as described in Methods section 4, encapsulating E. coli TxTl, 
αHL plasmid and T7 RNA polymerase plasmid. Population 2 was prepared with FRET dye pair (NBD and 
rhodamine) to trace fusion, and population 2 contained Ni-NTA lipids (or not, as indicated below). The 
population 1 was incubated at 30°C for 12h to induce αHL expression, followed by mixing with 
population 2. The FRET signal was analyzed, followed by Western Blot analysis of αHL expression. 
sample 1: αHL plasmid, T7 plasmid, NTA lipids, expected: fusion and αHL expression 
sample 2: αHL plasmid, T7 plasmid, no NTA lipids, expected: αHL expression, no fusion 
sample  : αHL plasmid, no T7 plasmid, NTA lipids, expected: no fusion and no αHL expression 
Dots on top of the bars indicate all the individual data points, the bars are the average value, n=3 
independently prepared and processed liposome samples. 
This data was collected using TxTl.   
supporting data for Figure 2, 
genetically encoded growth 
Figure S6 
 
 
 
Figure S6. His labeled αHL fusion, GFP data. 
Individual GFP fluorescence data points for the heatmap on Figure 2. Error bars indicate SEM, n=3 
independently prepared and processed liposome samples. 
Statistical analysis shows P values for each series of NTA concentrations compared to 0mM αHL plasmid. 
ns = P > 0.0 ; * = P ≤ 0.0 , ** = P ≤ 0.01, *** = P ≤ 0.001. 
This data was collected using TxTl. 
  
ns
**
ns ns
***
* ns
***
**
0
10
20
 0
40
 0
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
GFP  uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 0
***
***
*** *** *** *** ***
*** ***
0
 00
600
900
1200
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
GFP  uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 0.2
***
*** *** ***
*** ***
*** *** ***
0
 00
1000
1 00
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
GFP  uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 0.4
***
***
*** *** *** *** ***
*** ***
0
 00
1000
1 00
2000
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
GFP  uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 0.6
***
***
*** *** *** *** ***
*** ***
0
 00
1000
1 00
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
GFP  uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 0.8
***
***
*** ***
*** *** ***
*** ***
0
 00
1000
1 00
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
GFP  uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 1
***
*** *** *** *** *** ***
*** ***
0
 00
1000
1 00
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
GFP  uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 1.2 
***
***
*** *** *** *** *** *** ***
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
GFP  uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 1. 
***
*** *** *** ***
*** *** *** ***
0
200
400
600
800
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
GFP  uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 2
***
*** *** *** *** ***
*** ***
***
0
 0
100
1 0
200
2 0
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
GFP  uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 0.1
supporting data for Figure 2, 
genetically encoded growth 
Figure S7 
 
 
 
Figure S7. His labeled αHL fusion, Cy5 FRET data.  
Individual Cy5 FRET fluorescence data points for the heatmap on Figure 2. Error bars indicate SEM, n=3 
independently prepared and processed liposome samples. 
Statistical analysis shows P values for each series of NTA concentrations compared to 0mM αHL plasmid. 
ns = P > 0.0 ; * = P ≤ 0.0 , ** = P ≤ 0.01, *** = P ≤ 0.001. 
This data was collected using TxTl. 
  
ns ns ns ns
ns ns
ns ns
ns
220
240
260
280
 00
 20
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
cy   uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 0
ns ns
ns
ns
ns
ns ns ns ns
240
260
280
 00
 20
 40
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
cy  uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 0.1
ns
ns ns ns ns ns ns ns ns
0
100
200
 00
400
 00
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
cy  uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 0.2
ns
ns * ns ns ns ns ns ns
0
100
200
 00
400
 00
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
cy  uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 0.4
ns
ns * ns ns ns ns ns
ns
0
100
200
 00
400
 00
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
cy  uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 0.6
ns * ** * * * * *
ns
0
100
200
 00
400
 00
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
cy  uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 0.8
ns *** *** *** *** ** ** ** **
0
100
200
 00
400
 00
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
cy  uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 1
*
** *** *** ** ** *** ** **
0
100
200
 00
400
 00
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
cy  uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 1.2 
* ** *** *** ** ** *** ** **
0
100
200
 00
400
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
cy  uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 1. 
ns
** *** *** ** ** *** ** **
0
100
200
 00
400
0 1 2  4  7. 10 12. 1 
cy  uorescence
aHL plasmid  nM 
NTA mol% 2
supporting data for Figure 2, 
genetically encoded growth 
Figure S8 
 
 
 
Figure S8. Leakage test for NTA lipids.  
Testing leakage of calcein from liposomes with varying amount of NTA lipid in the membrane, expressed 
as mol% of total lipids. Leakage was calculated as % of calcein detected outside of the liposomes, 
measured via size exclusion chromatography purification after 12h incubation at 30°C.  
Examples of individual purification plots for samples summarized on this figure are on Figure S10. Dots 
on top of the bar graphs indicate individual values of three replicates. 
 
 
  
supporting data for Figure 2, 
genetically encoded growth 
Figure S9 
 
 
 
Figure S9. Test leakage for αHL expression.  
Testing leakage of calcein from liposomes with varying amount of αHL plasmid. Leakage was calculated 
as % of calcein detected outside of the liposomes, measured via size exclusion chromatography 
purification after 12h expression incubation at 30°C.  
Examples of individual purification plots for samples summarized on this figure are on Figure S11. Dots 
on top of the bar graphs indicate individual values of three replicates. 
This data was collected using TxTl. 
 
  
supporting data for Figure 2, 
genetically encoded growth 
Figure S10 
 
 
 
supporting data for Figure S8, 
genetically encoded growth 
0
10000
20000
 0000
40000
 0000
60000
70000
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
calcein, 0% NTA lipid
0
 0000
100000
1 0000
200000
2 0000
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
rhodamine, 0% NTA lipid
0
10000
20000
 0000
40000
 0000
60000
70000
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
calcein, 0.2 mol% NTA lipid
0
 0000
100000
1 0000
200000
2 0000
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
rhodamine, 0.2 mol% NTA lipid
0
10000
20000
 0000
40000
 0000
60000
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
calcein, 0.  mol% NTA lipid
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
160000
180000
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
rhodamine, 0.  mol% NTA lipid
0
10000
20000
 0000
40000
 0000
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
calcein, 2 mol% NTA lipid
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
160000
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
rhodamine, 2 mol% NTA lipid
liposomes 
free solutes 
Figure S10. Leakage test for NTA lipids. 
Example plots from size exclusion chromatography purification of liposomes with varying amount of 
NTA lipid as mol% of total lipids. Leakage of small molecule calcein was tested in liposomes with NTA 
lipids, after 12h incubation at 30°C. Liposomes contained 1mM calcein at the beginning of the 
experiment.  
Each sample was analyzed using two fluorescent measurements: calcein channel and rhodamine 
channel (see Table S5 for wavelengths). The calcein channel traces indicate leakage of small molecules 
and the rhodamine (red membrane dye, Lissamine Rhodamine B 1,2-Dihexadecanoyl-sn-Glycero-3-
Phosphoethanolamine) channel indicates which fractions contain liposomes. 
   
Figure S11 
 
Figure S11. Test leakage for αHL expression. 
Example plots from size exclusion chromatography purification of liposomes with varying amount of αHL 
plasmid. Leakage of small molecule calcein was tested after 12h incubation at 30°C. Liposomes 
contained 1mM calcein at the beginning of the experiment.  
Each sample was analyzed using two fluorescent measurements: calcein channel and rhodamine 
channel (see Table S5 for wavelengths). The calcein channel traces indicate leakage of small molecules 
and the rhodamine (red membrane dye, Lissamine Rhodamine B 1,2-Dihexadecanoyl-sn-Glycero-3-
Phosphoethanolamine) channel indicates which fractions contain liposomes. 
This data was collected using TxTl.   
supporting data for Figure S9, 
genetically encoded growth 
0
1000
2000
 000
4000
 000
6000
7000
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
calcein, 0mM aHL
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
rhodamine, 0mM aHL
0
 00
1000
1 00
2000
2 00
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
calcein, 2mM aHL
0
1000
2000
 000
4000
 000
6000
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
rhodamine, 2mM aHL
0
1000
2000
 000
4000
 000
6000
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
calcein, 10mM aHL
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
rhodamine, 10mM aHL
Figure S12 
 
 
 
Figure S12. Liposome fusion testing at different liposome ratios. 
Individual data points for the heat map on Figure 2. 
Dots on top of the bar graphs indicate individual values of three replicates. Statistical analysis shows P 
values for each series of liposome concentrations compared to NTA liposomes 0. x. ns = P > 0.0 ; * = P ≤ 
0.0 , ** = P ≤ 0.01, *** = P ≤ 0.001. 
This data was collected using TxTl.  
ns ns ns ns ns
0
1000
2000GFP  uorescence
aHL liposomes 0. x
** ** * ** *
0
2000
4000GFP  uorescence
aHL liposomes 1x
* * ** * **
0
2000
4000
6000GFP  uorescence
aHL liposomes 1. x
*
** ** *
*
0
2000
4000
6000GFP  uorescence
aHL liposomes 2x
** *** * * **
0
2000
4000
6000GFP  uorescence
aHL liposomes 2. x
* * * ** **
0
2000
4000
6000GFP  uorescence
aHL liposomes  x
supporting data for Figure 2, 
genetically encoded growth 
Figure S13 
 
Figure S13. GFP DNA and GFP mRNA after genetically encoded lumen mixing of synthetic cells.  
Individual data points for quantification of GFP plasmid and GFP mRNA in synthetic cells after fusion 
event data shown on Figure 2. Samples are in the same order as shown on panels J and K of Figure 2. 
Sample 1: 1x cells of population 1 (with T7RNAP and αHL), 1x population 2 (with GFP plasmid) with Ni-
NTA, expected fusion 
Sample 2: 1x cells of population 1 (with T7RNAP and αHL), 1x population 2 (with GFP plasmid) without 
Ni-NTA, no fusion is expected 
Sample 3: 1x cells of population 1 (with T7RNAP and αHL), 2x population 2 (with GFP plasmid) with Ni-
NTA, expected fusion 
Sample 4: 1x cells of population 1 (with T7RNAP and αHL), 2x population 2 (with GFP plasmid) without 
Ni-NTA, no fusion is expected 
Sample 5: 2x cells of population 1 (with T7RNAP and αHL), 1x population 2 (with GFP plasmid) with Ni-
NTA, expected fusion 
Sample 6: 2x cells of population 1 (with T7RNAP and αHL), 1x population 2 (with GFP plasmid) without 
Ni-NTA, no fusion is expected 
Bar graphs represent average value, dots are individual data points for each replicate.  
Statistical analysis shows P values for each series of NTA concentrations compared to negative control 
experiment of no Ni-NTA in Sample 2. ns = P > 0.0 ; * = P ≤ 0.0 , ** = P ≤ 0.01, *** = P ≤ 0.001. 
This data was collected using TxTl. 
 
  
ns
*** **
ns ns
0
12
24
1 2  4  6
nM
GFP DNA
** ***
ns
***
ns
0
100
200
1 2  4  6
nM
GFP mRNA
supporting data for Figure 2, 
genetically encoded growth 
Figure S14 
 
 
 
Figure S14. General scheme for liposome FRET size measurement.  
Liposome fusion experiment monitored by FRET effect, measuring fluorescence of donor dye from the 
FRET pair.  
In synthetic cell fusion experiments, one population of cells contains both FRET donor and FRET 
acceptor, while the other population does not contain any FRET dyes. Before fusion, the FRET dyes are 
in relatively close proximity, resulting in high FRET effect, which means low donor fluorescence signa 
and higher acceptor fluorescence signal. After fusion and membrane mixing, the FRET dyes are “diluted” 
in the now larger membrane, putting the FRET dyes further apart from each other on the larger 
membrane surface. The efficiency of the FRET effect decreases, which results in increase of donor 
fluorescence and decrease of acceptor fluorescence.   
In the fusion experiments in this work, two different pairs of FRET dyes were used.  
Donor NBD - acceptor Rhodamine, this dye pair was used when no concurrent GFP monitoring was 
needed (since NBD fluorescence spectrally overlaps with GFP) 
Donor Cy5 – acceptor Cy7, this dye pair was used to allow for monitoring of GFP fluorescence at the 
same time. 
In all FRET experiments, we monitored the fluorescence of the donor dye. Increased donor fluorescence 
indicated increased membrane mixing.  
  
supporting data for Figure 2, 
genetically encoded growth 
Figure S15 
 
 
 
Figure S15. Optimization of synthetic cell media.  
GFP expression in synthetic cells with 10nM αHL plasmid (and control without αHL), with the external 
buffer (“media”) contained varying amounts of one of the three cell-free translation system 
components: “salt”, “amino acids” and “energy mix”. Values on the plot correspond to the standard 
reaction final concentration of 1x, so 0.5 is 50% final concentration compared to standard reaction 
conditions, and 1.5 is 150% of the standard reaction conditions concentration (see methods section 13). 
Samples were incubated at 30°C for 24h. End point GFP fluorescence was recorded. 
The 1x, or 100%, concentrations used through this project were:  
“salt” mixture: 1 0mM potassium glutamate, 10mM ammonium acetate, 10mM magnesium glutamate 
“amino acid” mixture: 2mM of each of the 20 amino acids from a KOH amino acid stock 
“energy mix” mixture: 1. mM ATP and GTP, 0.9mM CTP and UTP, 0.068mM folinic acid, 200ug/mL of E. 
coli tRNA mixture, 0.33mM nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), 0.26mM coenzyme-A (CoA), 
1.5mM spermidine, 4mM sodium oxalate, 0.75mM cAMP, 30mM 3-PGA, 50mM HEPES pH 8. 
The “no αHL” control contained GFP plasmid but no αHL plasmid, and the external media was at highest 
concentration of all three components (1.5x salt, amino acid and energy mixes). 
Individual data points for all heatmap points are in Figure S16. 
This data was collected using TxTl. 
 
 
 
 
  
no 
 HL 
salt
0
0. 
1
1. 
GFP  uorescence maxmin
0 0. 1 1. 0 0. 1 1. 0 0. 1 1. 0 0. 1 1. 
0 0. 1.0 1. 
amino
acids
energy 
mix
supporting data for Figure 2, 
synthetic cell culture media 
Figure S16 
 
 
supporting data for Figure S15, 
synthetic cell culture media 
 
Figure S16. Optimization of synthetic cell media. 
Individual data points for the heat map on Figure S15. aa: amino acids. 
The “no αHL” control contained GFP plasmid but no αHL plasmid, and the external media was at highest 
concentration of all three components (1.5x salt, amino acid and energy mixes). 
Dots on top of the bar graphs indicate individual values of three replicates.  
This data was collected using TxTl. 
  

Figure S17 
 
 
 
Figure S17. VAMP2-His fusion testing. 
A: Two populations of synthetic cells were mixed, population 1 containing VAMP transmembrane 
domain labeled with His tag and encapsulating T7 RNA polymerase, and population 2 containing Ni-NTA 
lipid tags and encapsulating plasmid with GFP under T7 promoter. Only if the lumen of the membranes 
fuses, GFP could be expressed (T7 RNA polymerase from population 1 is needed to express GFP plasmid 
in population 2). 
B: Lumen fusion, measured as expression of GFP, for experiments with varying amount of VAMP protein 
and varying amount of NTA lipid (described as mol% of total lipid). Higher GFP fluorescence means more 
lumen mixing.  
C: Membrane mixing, measured as FRET interaction between Cy5 and Cy7 FRET pair (see Figure S14 for 
general scheme of FRET experiment). Higher Cy5 fluorescence means more membrane mixing. 
Population 2 was labeled with 0.1mol% of each Cy5 and Cy7 lipid anchored dyes.  
Individual heat map data points for GFP are on Figure S18, and individual heat map data points for Cy5 
are on Figure S19.  
This data was collected using TxTl.   
supporting data for Figure 2, 
genetically encoded growth 
Figure S18 
 
 
 
Figure S18. VAMP2-His fusion testing, GFP. 
Data points for heat map on Figure S17, GFP fluorescence (see Table S5 for wavelengths). Error bars 
indicate SEM, n=3 independently prepared and processed liposome samples. 
This data was collected using TxTl. 
 
 
  
supporting data for Figure S17, 
genetically encoded growth 
Figure S19 
 
 
 
Figure S19. VAMP2-His fusion testing, Cy5. 
Data points for heat map on Figure S17, Cy5 fluorescence (see Table S5 for wavelengths). Higher Cy5 
fluorescence means more membrane mixing. Population 2 was labeled with 0.1mol% of each Cy5 and 
Cy7 lipid anchored dyes. 
Error bars indicate SEM, n=3 independently prepared and processed liposome samples. 
This data was collected using TxTl. 
  
supporting data for Figure S17, 
genetically encoded growth 
Figure S20 
 
 
 
Figure S20. Fusion with αHL introduced externally. 
Fusion between two populations of synthetic cells, one carrying T7RNAP and the other population 
carrying GFP DNA and Ni-NTA lipid tag. Lumen fusion was monitored by GFP expression (panel A) and 
membrane mixing was monitored by Cy5 FRET signal (panel B).  
Individual heat map data points for GFP are on Figure S21 and individual heat map data points for Cy5 
are on Figure S22.  
After fusion, selected samples were purified on size exclusion column to measure content leakage, data 
on Figure S23. 
This data was collected using TxTl. 
  
supporting data for Figure 2, 
genetically encoded growth 
Figure S21 
 
 
 
Figure S21. Fusion testing with external αHL, GFP signal. 
Individual GFP fluorescence data points for the heatmap on Figure S20. Error bars indicate SEM, n=3 
independently prepared and processed liposome samples. 
This data was collected using TxTl. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
supporting data for Figure S20, 
genetically encoded growth 
Figure S22 
 
 
 
Figure S22. Fusion testing with external αHL, Cy5 signal. 
Individual Cy5 FRET fluorescence data points for the heatmap on Figure S20. Error bars indicate SEM, 
n=3 independently prepared and processed liposome samples. 
This data was collected using TxTl. 
 
 
 
 
  
supporting data for Figure S20, 
genetically encoded growth 
Figure S23 
 
 
 
Figure S23. Leakage test for His labeled αHL fusion experiments.  
Dots on top of the bar graphs indicate individual values of three replicates.  
Samples shown on this figure are selected from the fusion experiment presented as heatmap data on 
Figure S20. 
Examples of individual purification plots for samples summarized on this figure are on Figure S24. 
This data was collected using TxTl. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
supporting data for Figure S20, 
genetically encoded growth 
Figure S24 
 
 
Figure S24. Leakage test for αHL fusion experiments. 
Example plots from size exclusion chromatography purification of liposomes with varying amount of αHL 
plasmid, and varying amount of NTA lipid as mol% of total lipids. Leakage of small molecule calcein was 
tested after 12h incubation at 30°C. Liposomes contained 1mM calcein at the beginning of the 
experiment.  
Each sample was analyzed using two fluorescent measurements: calcein channel and Cy5 channel (see 
Table S5 for wavelengths). The calcein channel traces indicate leakage of small molecule and the Cy5 
channel (Cy5 lipid dye 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-(Cyanine 5)) indicates which 
fractions contain liposomes. 
This data was collected using TxTl. 
 
  
0
100
200
 00
400
 00
600
700
800
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
calcein, 0.2mol% NTA,  nM aHL
0
 0
100
1 0
200
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
cy , 0.2mol% NTA,  nM aHL
0
100
200
 00
400
 00
600
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
calcein, 0.6mol% NTA, 4nM aHL
0
 0
100
1 0
200
2 0
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
cy , 0.6mol% NTA, 4nM aHL
0
100
200
 00
400
 00
600
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
calcein, 1mol% NTA, 10nM aHL
0
 0
100
1 0
200
2 0
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
cy , 1mol% NTA, 10nM aHL
supporting data for Figure S23, 
genetically encoded growth 
Figure S25 
 
Figure S25. Synthetic cells after 5 generations of growth and division with dialysis removing feeder 
liposomes. 
The experiments were performed according to the same protocol as experiments on Figure 3, but after 
each addition of feeder liposomes and 12h incubation at 30°C, samples were dialyzed for 4h against 
1μm filter to remove free feeder liposomes. See Methods section 24 for details. Dialysis time course is 
on Figure S26. 
A: qPCR quantification of new DNA, indicating Phi29 genome replication. The samples were treated with 
DpnI, removing the original plasmid DNA, so only newly synthesized DNA was detectable.  
B: RT qPCR quantification of the mRNA abundance.  
C: quantification of the generation counter, detecting the counter product of the indicated number of 
generations. Samples were processed with either primer for generation 3 (labeled gen3, detecting three, 
four, or five generations), primer for generation 4 (labeled gen4, detecting three or four generations), or 
the primer for generation 5 (labeled gen5, detecting only the results of five generations). 
All experiments were performed in four separate variants: the complete cell cycle with Phi29 genome 
replication and with feeder liposome fusion (symbol ); without Phi29 genome replication, but with 
feeder liposome fusion (symbol ); with Phi29 for genome replication, but without feeder liposome 
fusion (symbol ); and without either Phi29 genome replication or feeding (symbol ).  
Individual data points for the box and whiskers plots are on Figure S27.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP.  
supporting data for Figure 3, 
cell cycle 
Figure S26 
 
Figure S26. Dialysis time course of removing “feeder” liposomes. 
The model “feeder” 0.4μm liposomes were prepared with 10nM GFP plasmid (no transcription and 
translation system, just plasmid for quantitative detection). The “big” liposomes were prepared to 
model “parent” synthetic cells in the growth and feeding experiments, with average diameter of 2-3uM, 
those liposomes were filled with 10nM αHL plasmid (no transcription and translation system, just 
plasmid for quantitative detection). 
Samples were dialyzed for amount of time indicated on X axis, with time 0 being a sample mixed in 
dialyzer and immediately collected for analysis.  
Data shows qPCR abundance of GFP and αHL plasmids in the external dialysis buffer (showing material 
removed from the original sample).  
Bar graphs represent average value, dots are individual data points for each replicate.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
  
0
 
10
0 1 2  4  6
nM
 me  h 
 feeder  liposomes, GFP DNA
0
1
2
0 1 2  4  6
nM
 me  h 
 big  liposomes, aHL DNA
supporting data for Figure S25, 
cell cycle 
Figure S27 
 
Figure S27. 5 Generations of growth and division with dialysis.  
Individual data points for box and whiskers plots on Figure S25, analysis of plasmids, mRNA and 
generation counter oligo after 5 generations of growth and division with dialysis after each generation.  
All experiments were performed in four separate variants: the complete cell cycle with Phi29 genome 
replication and with feeder liposome fusion (symbol , labeled sample 1 on this figure); without Phi29 
genome replication, but with feeder liposome fusion (symbol , labeled sample 2 on this figure); with 
Phi29 for genome replication, but without feeder liposome fusion (symbol , labeled sample 3 on this 
figure); and without either Phi29 genome replication or feeding (symbol , labeled sample 4 on this 
figure).  
Sample 1: Phi29, fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 5 
Sample 2: No Phi29, fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 5 
Sample 3: Phi29, No Fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 5 
Sample 4: No Phi29, No Fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 5 
Bar graphs represent average value, dots are individual data points for each replicate.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP.  
0
10
20
1 2  4
nM
new GFP DNA
0
100
200
1 2  4
nM
GFP mRNA
0
7
14
1 2  4
nM
new aHL DNA
0
80
160
1 2  4
nM
aHL mRNA
0
 0
60
1 2  4
nM
Gen Counter   
0
 0
60
1 2  4
nM
Gen Counter 4 
0
20
40
1 2  4
nM
Gen Counter   
0
2
4
1 2  4
nM
new pLD1 DNA
0
2
4
6
8
1 2  4
nM
new pLD2 DNA
0
2
4
6
8
1 2  4
nM
new pLD  DNA
0
10
20
1 2  4
nM
new pREP DNA
0
10
20
1 2  4
nM
new T7RNAP DNA
supporting data for Figure S25, 
cell cycle 
Figure S28 
 
 
 
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
RF1
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
HisRS
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
TyrRS
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
TrpRS
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
SerRS
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
CysRS
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
ValRS
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
MetRS
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
ArgRS
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
ThrRS
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
GlnRS
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
LeuRS
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
LysRS
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
AsnRS
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
IleRS
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
AlaRS
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
PheRS 
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
PheRS 
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
FMT
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
EF Ts
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
IF 
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
IF1
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
AspRS
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
ProRS
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
GlyRS  
supporting data for Figure 3, 
cell cycle 
 
 
Figure S28. All genes in 90kB synthetic cell genome after 5 generations of cell cycle. 
Quantification of all genes in the synthetic cell genome undergoing 5 generations of cell cycle (data for 
genes not included on the figure 3). 
For each gene, 4 individual experimental conditions were tested, labeled a, b, c and d on the graphs.  
sample a: the complete cell cycle with Phi29 genome replication and with feeder liposome fusion 
(labeled with symbol  on the main figures);  
sample b: without Phi29 genome replication, but with feeder liposome fusion (labeled with symbol  on 
the main figures);  
sample c: with Phi29 for genome replication, but without feeder liposome fusion (labeled with symbol  
on the main figures);  
sample d: and without either Phi29 genome replication or feeding (labeled with symbol  on the main 
figures).  
Individual data points for all data on this figure are on Figure S29. 
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
 
Related data: abundance of each individual gene in the sample after 5 generations is on Figure S28 
(with individual data points on Figure S29), abundance of each plasmid in single cells is on Figure S32, 
count of cells expressing GFP after each cycle is on Figure S30, and abundance of full length generation 
counter oligo in single cells after each generation is on Figure S37. 
  
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
GlyRS  
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
GluRS
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
RF 
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
RF2
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
EF G
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
RRF
0
4
8
a b c d
nM
IF2
Figure S29 
Figure S29. Quantification of individual genes in the synthetic cell genome after 5 generations of cell 
cycle. 
Individual data points for qPCR data of quantification of all genes in the synthetic cell genome 
undergoing 5 generations of cell cycle from Figure S28. 
0
4
8
RF1
HisRS
TyrRS
CysRS
TrpRS
SerRS
ValRS
MetRS
ArgRS
GlnRS
LeuRS
ThrRS
LysRS
AsnRS
IleRS
AlaRS
PheRS 
PheRS 
FMT
EF Ts
IF 
IF1
AspRS
ProRS
GlyRS  
GlyRS  
GluRS
RF 
RF2
RRF
EF G
IF2
nM
phi29, fusion
0
0. 
1
RF1
HisRS
TyrRS
CysRS
TrpRS
SerRS
ValRS
MetRS
ArgRS
GlnRS
LeuRS
ThrRS
LysRS
AsnRS
IleRS
AlaRS
PheRS 
PheRS 
FMT
EF Ts
IF 
IF1
AspRS
ProRS
GlyRS  
GlyRS  
GluRS
RF 
RF2
RRF
EF G
IF2
nM
no phi29, fusion
0
4
8
RF1
HisRS
TyrRS
CysRS
TrpRS
SerRS
ValRS
MetRS
ArgRS
GlnRS
LeuRS
ThrRS
LysRS
AsnRS
IleRS
AlaRS
PheRS 
PheRS 
FMT
EF Ts
IF 
IF1
AspRS
ProRS
GlyRS  
GlyRS  
GluRS
RF 
RF2
RRF
EF G
IF2
nM
phi29, no fusion
0
0. 
1
RF1
HisRS
TyrRS
CysRS
TrpRS
SerRS
ValRS
MetRS
ArgRS
GlnRS
LeuRS
ThrRS
LysRS
AsnRS
IleRS
AlaRS
PheRS 
PheRS 
FMT
EF Ts
IF 
IF1
AspRS
ProRS
GlyRS  
GlyRS  
GluRS
RF 
RF2
RRF
EF G
IF2
nM
no phi219, no fusion
supporting data for Figure S28, 
cell cycle 
For each gene, 4 individual experimental conditions were tested: 
Phi 29, fusion: the complete cell cycle with Phi29 genome replication and with feeder liposome fusion, 
labeled with symbol  on the main figures, and labeled “a” in box and whiskers plots on Figure S28. 
no Phi29, fusion: without Phi29 genome replication, but with feeder liposome fusion, labeled with 
symbol  on the main figures, and labeled “b” in box and whiskers plots on Figure S28. 
Phi 29, no fusion: with Phi29 for genome replication, but without feeder liposome fusion (labeled with 
symbol  on the main figures, and labeled “c” in box and whiskers plots on Figure S28. 
no Phi 29, no fusion: and without either Phi29 genome replication or feeding (labeled with symbol  on 
the main figures, and labeled “d” in box and whiskers plots on Figure S28. 
Dots on top of the bars indicate all the individual data points, the bars are the average value. 
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
 
Related data: abundance of each individual gene in the sample after 5 generations is on Figure S28 
(with individual data points on Figure S29), abundance of each plasmid in single cells is on Figure S32, 
count of cells expressing GFP after each cycle is on Figure S30, and abundance of full length generation 
counter oligo in single cells after each generation is on Figure S37. 
 
  

Figure S30 
 
 
 
Figure S30. GFP fluorescence in synthetic cells.  
Flow cytometry measurements indicating what percent of total synthetic cell population contains 
detectable amount of GFP, measured after 3, 4 and 5 cycles of Phi29 genome replication and with 
feeder liposome fusion (labeled with symbol  on the main figures). 
See Methods section 17 “Flow cytometry” for measurement protocol. For each measurement, 
experiments were performed after the extrusion step, and samples were dialyzed to remove feeder 
vesicles. 
Dots on top of the bars indicate all the individual data points, the bars are the average value. 
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
 
Related data: abundance of each individual gene in the sample after 5 generations is on Figure S28 
(with individual data points on Figure S29), abundance of each plasmid in single cells is on Figure S32, 
count of cells expressing GFP after each cycle is on Figure S30, and abundance of full length generation 
counter oligo in single cells after each generation is on Figure S37. 
  
0
 0
100
gen  gen 4 gen  
% cells containing GFP
genera on of cell cycle
supporting data for Figure 3,  
cell cycle  
Figure S31
 
 
Figure S31. Fluorescence microscopy of synthetic cell samples, imaged after five generations. 
The green channel is GFP fluorescence, and the red channel is rhodamine membrane dye. Samples are 
labeled according to the conditions of the cell cycle experiment: the complete cell cycle with Phi29 
genome replication and with feeder liposomes (symbol ); and without either Phi29 genome replication 
or feeding (symbol ).  
supporting data for Figure 3,  
cell cycle  
 
A: The complete cell cycle with Phi29 genome replication and with feeder liposomes. The red and green 
channels and the composite for the image shown on Figure 3M. Scale bar is 20µm. 
B: Samples without either Phi29 genome replication or feeding. The red and green channels and the 
composite for the image shown on Figure 3N. Scale bar is 20µm. 
C: Two fields of view from lower concentration imaging, samples with the complete cell cycle with Phi29 
genome replication and with feeder liposomes. Scale bar is 50µm. 
D: Two fields of view from lower concentration imaging, samples without either Phi29 genome 
replication or feeding. Scale bar is 50µm. 
Panels A and B: The samples were imaged at the highest concentration possible, without diluting from 
the cell cycle experiments (applied in the middle of a cover slip for immediate imaging). Scale bar is 
20µm. 
Panels C and D: The samples were diluted 100x for imaging. Scale bar is 50µm. 
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
  
Figure S32 
 
Figure S32. Abundance of each plasmid in single cell experiments after 5 generations of cell cycle.  
Single cell amplification and qPCR analysis of abundance of each of the individual plasmids (see Table S6 
for the list of plasmids) in a synthetic cell genome, after 5 cycles of growth and replication (condition 
labeled with symbol  through Figure 3).  
Black line shows threshold of detection (Cq below 45), plasmid was not considered present if Cq value 
was above that number.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
Related data: abundance of each individual gene in the sample after 5 generations is on Figure S28 
(with individual data points on Figure S29), abundance of each plasmid in single cells is on Figure S32, 
count of cells expressing GFP after each cycle is on Figure S30, and abundance of full length generation 
counter oligo in single cells after each generation is on Figure S37. 
supporting data for Figure 3, 
cell cycle 
 
  
  
             
  
             
    
 
  
  
             
  
             
    
 
  
  
             
  
             
    
 
  
  
             
  
             
    
 
  
  
             
  
             
   
 
  
  
             
  
             
      
 
  
  
             
  
             
   
Figure S33 
 
Figure S33. Summary of single cell analysis of abundance of each plasmid. 
Analysis was done on samples after 5 cycles of growth and division. Total of 95 samples were analyzed.  
This is summary of individual cell data shown on Figure S32. 
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
  
40  0 60 70
pREP
pLD1
pLD2
pLD 
GFP
T7RNAP
aHL
detected in % of samples
plasmid
supporting data for Figure 3, 
cell cycle 
 
Figure S34 
 
Figure S34. Individual data points for 5 generations of growth and division. 
Individual data points for data shown on box and whiskers plots on Figure 3.  
All experiments were performed in four separate variants: the complete cell cycle with Phi29 genome 
replication and with feeder liposome fusion (symbol , labeled samples 1, 5 and 9 on this figure); 
without Phi29 genome replication, but with feeder liposome fusion (symbol , labeled samples 2, 6 and 
10 on this figure); with Phi29 for genome replication, but without feeder liposome fusion (symbol , 
labeled samples 3, 7 and 11 on this figure); and without either Phi29 genome replication or feeding 
(symbol , labeled samples 4, 8 and 12 on this figure).  
Statistical significance analysis showing P values is in Table S9. 
Sample 1: Phi29, fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 3 
Sample 2: No Phi29, fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 3 
0
10
20
1 2  4  6 7 8 9 10 11 12
nM
new GFP DNA
0
100
200
1 2  4  6 7 8 9 10 11 12
nM
GFP mRNA
0
10
20
1 2  4  6 7 8 9 10 11 12
nM
new aHL DNA
0
100
200
1 2  4  6 7 8 9 10 11 12
nM
aHL mRNA
0
40
80
1 2  4  6 7 8 9 10 11 12
nM
Gen Counter   
0
40
80
1 2  4  6 7 8 9 10 11 12
nM
Gen Counter 4 
0
20
40
1 2  4  6 7 8 9 10 11 12
nM
Gen Counter   
0
 
6
1 2  4  6 7 8 9 10 11 12
nM
new pLD1 DNA
0
6
12
1 2  4  6 7 8 9 10 11 12
nM
new pLD2 DNA
0
6
12
1 2  4  6 7 8 9 10 11 12
nM
new pLD  DNA
0
6
12
18
24
 0
1 2  4  6 7 8 9 10 11 12
nM
new pREP DNA
0
6
12
18
24
 0
1 2  4  6 7 8 9 10 11 12
nM
new T7RNAP DNA
supporting data for Figure 3, 
cell cycle 
Sample 3: Phi29, No Fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 3 
Sample 4: No Phi29, No Fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 3 
Sample 5: Phi29, fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 4 
Sample 6: No Phi29, fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 4 
Sample 7: Phi29, No Fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 4 
Sample 8: No Phi29, No Fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 4 
Sample 9: Phi29, fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 5 
Sample 10: No Phi29, fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 5 
Sample 11: Phi29, No Fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 5 
Sample 12: No Phi29, No Fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 5 
Bar graphs represent average value, dots are individual data points for each replicate.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
 
  

Figure S35 
 
 
Figure S35. Detection of component leakage from cells after 5 generations of growth and division. 
Cells undergo 5 generations of complete growth and replication, the complete cell cycle with Phi29 
genome replication and with feeder liposomes (symbol ). Cells were prepared as described before 
(Methods section 11).  
After 5 cycles of growth and replication, and final extrusion, cells were purified on size exclusion 
chromatography (Methods section 27), then both free solute fraction and the synthetic cell fractions 
were collected. The fractions were concentrated by lyophilization and resuspended to total volume of 
10uL, and processed through a qPCR analysis (Methods section 14) to quantify amount of the GFP 
plasmid, the GFP mRNA, and the 16S ribosomal RNA.  
It is important to note that the concentrations reported here do not represent actual concentrations in 
the original cell sample. The cells were diluted during the column purification and re-concentrated after 
collecting fractions. This is a qualitative detection test, to check the integrity of the cells (leakage of 
nucleic acids and ribosomes) after cycles of growth and replication.  
Due to the low total concentration of GFP in the collected cell fractions and no detectable GFP signal in 
free solute fraction, fractions containing cells were collected mostly based on the characteristic 
meniscus appearance of the wells containing cells, and free solute fraction was collected to very 
generously encompass all fraction from the end of the cell fraction till the end of the run.   
Results shown on this figure show plasmid abundance analysis for plasmid, mRNA and ribosomal RNA in 
the synthetic cell fraction and in the free solute fraction.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP.  
0
1 
 0
cells free solute
nM
GFP plasmid
0
1 0
 00
cells free solute
nM
GFP mRNA
0
1 0
 00
cells free solute
nM
16S ribosomal RNA
supporting data for Figure 3,  
cell cycle  
Figure S36 
 
 
 
Figure S36. Fusion efficiency across multiple generations. 
The starting synthetic cells contained T7 RNA polymerase and TxTl machinery expressing αHL, but no 
GFP plasmid. Generation of growth and division experiments were performed, as described on Figure 3 
and in Methods section 11. The “feeder vesicles” were being added, containing all metabolites as 
described in Methods section 11, and at a generation indicated for testing also contained a GFP plasmid. 
Cells were dialyzed, normalized to the same cell density (see Supplementary text section 5), and GFP 
fluorescence was measured to indicate fusion efficiency.  
Dots on top of the bars indicate all the individual data points, the bars are the average value. 
This data was collected using PURE pREP.  
0
1000
2000
1 2  4  
GFP RFU
genera on
supporting data for Figure 3,  
cell cycle  
Figure S37 
 
 
 
Figure S37. Full length generation counter oligo after each generation. 
Single cell amplification and qPCR analysis of abundance of full length generation counter oligo, after 3, 
4 and 5 cycles of growth and replication (condition labeled with symbol  through Figure 3).  
Black line shows threshold of detection (Cq below 45), oligo was not considered present if Cq value was 
above that number.  
In summary, 78 cells collected after generation 3 contained full length generation 3 product, 67 cells 
collected after generation 4 contained full length generation 4 product, 59 cells collected after 
generation 5 contained full length generation 5 product. 
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
 
Related data: abundance of each individual gene in the sample after 5 generations is on Figure S28 
(with individual data points on Figure S29), abundance of each plasmid in single cells is on Figure S32, 
count of cells expressing GFP after each cycle is on Figure S30, and abundance of full-length generation 
counter oligo in single cells after each generation is on Figure S37.  
 
  
  
             
  
             
            
 
  
  
             
  
             
            
 
  
  
             
  
             
            
supporting data for Figure 3,  
cell cycle  
Figure S38 
 
 
 
Figure S38. Investigating fusion between synthetic cells. 
This experiment investigates the possibility of fusion between two synthetic cells (not between synthetic 
cell and feeder vesicles). 
Two populations of synthetic cells were prepared. The cells contained a genome comprised of T7RNAP, 
αHL. One population of cells carried GFP plasmid under control of T  RNA polymerase promoter, while 
the other population contained T3 RNA polymerase gene under control of T7 promoter. Expression of 
GFP was only possible if the cells containing T3 RNAP fused with cells containing the GFP plasmid.  
The two populations of synthetic cells (one carrying T3RNAP and one carrying GFP plasmid under T3 
promoter) were mixed at the start of the experiment, and generations of growth and division 
experiments were performed as described earlier. After each generation, GFP fluorescence was 
measured, to monitor possible fusion between synthetic cells (not fusion between synthetic cell and 
feeder liposome).  
Sample labels: gen1, gen2, gen3, gen4, gen5 - samples analyzed after indicated generation; positive - a 
positive control of GFP fluorescence from GFP under T7 RNAP in synthetic cells that did undergo all 5 
cycles of growth and division; negative – synthetic cells after 5 cycles of growth and division without any 
GFP plasmid.  
Dots on top of the bars indicate all the individual data points, the bars are the average value. 
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
  
800
1100
1400RFU
0
 0
100RFU
supporting data for Figure 3,  
cell cycle  
Figure S39 
 
 
Figure S39. Cell number changes during cell cycle and replication.  
After each experiment of complete cell cycle (feeding, DNA replication, division, condition labeled with 
symbol  on Figure 3), at the end of the generation (after extrusion, before next feeding), cells were 
diluted 100,000x (5 serial dilutions) and loaded into a hemocytometer. In each count, cells in three of 
the 9 large hemocytometer squares were counted. For each experiment, aliquot was prepared from 
three replicates.  
Values reported in this figure show average number of cells per 1ul in the diluted sample.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP.  
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
gen gen4 gen 
cells per uL in diluted sample
supporting data for Figure 3,  
cell cycle  
Figure S40 
 
 
 
Figure S40. Cell cycle without fluorescent proteins. 
Results of 5 generations of growth and division experiments, without fluorescent proteins. This 
experiment demonstrates that the metabolic load from expressing the reporter fluorescent proteins do 
not significantly affect genome replication through the cell cycle.   
For easy comparison, the new results (lighter gray) are compared on each graph with results of previous 
cell cycle experiments where samples contained GFP.  
0
10
20
1 2  4 1 2   4 
nM
new aHL DNA
0
1 0
1 2  4 1 2   4 
nM
aHL mRNA
0
100
1 2  4 1 2   4 
nM
Gen Counter   
0
 0
100
1 2  4 1 2   4 
nM
Gen Counter 4 
0
20
40
1 2  4 1 2   4 
nM
Gen Counter   
0
4
8
1 2  4 1 2   4 
nM
new pLD1 DNA
0
6
12
1 2  4 1 2   4 
nM
new pLD2 DNA
0
6
12
1 2  4 1 2   4 
nM
new pLD  DNA
0
1 
 0
1 2  4 1 2   4 
nM
new pREP DNA
0
1 
 0
1 2  4 1 2   4 
nM
new T7RNAP DNA
supporting data for Figure 3,  
cell cycle  
Sample labeling:  
Sample 1: Phi29, fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 5 
Sample 2: No Phi29, fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 5 
Sample 3: Phi29, No Fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 5 
Sample 4: No Phi29, No Fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 5 
Darker color, comparison with previous results: 
Sample 1`: Phi29, fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 5 (results shown on figure 3) 
Sample 2`: No Phi29, fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 5 (results shown on figure 3) 
Sample 3`: Phi29, No Fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 5 (results shown on figure 3) 
Sample 4`: No Phi29, No Fusion (symbol  on figure 3), Generation 5 (results shown on figure 3) 
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
  

Figure S41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S41. Membrane stability in presence of fluorescent protein GFP. 
Synthetic cells were created with GFP plasmid. The cells also contained 1mM of Cy5.5. After 12h 
incubation at 30°C, cells were purified (methods section 27) to measure leakage of the small molecule 
dye.  
Each panel shows one purification trace, label indicated type of cells (GFP containing cells on this figure), 
type of readout of fluorescence (GFP channel or Cy5.5 channel, see Table S5 for list of wavelengths 
used), and replicate sample number (3 independent samples).  
This data was collected using PURE pREP.  
supporting data for Figure 3,  
cell cycle  
0
100
200
 00
400
 00
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
GFP cells, GFP channel; sample1
0
 00
1000
1 00
2000
2 00
 000
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
GFP cells, Cy . channel; sample1
0
100
200
 00
400
 00
600
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
GFP cells, GFP channel; sample2
0
 00
1000
1 00
2000
2 00
 000
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
GFP cells, Cy . channel; sample2
0
100
200
 00
400
 00
600
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
GFP cells, GFP channel; sample 
0
 00
1000
1 00
2000
2 00
 000
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
GFP cells, Cy . channel; sample 
Figure S42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S42. Membrane stability in presence of fluorescent protein mCherry. 
Synthetic cells were created with mCherry plasmid. The cells also contained 1mM calcein. After 12h 
incubation at 30°C, cells were purified (methods section 27) to measure leakage of the small molecule 
dye.  
Each panel shows one purification trace, label indicated type of cells (mCherry containing cells on this 
figure), type of readout of fluorescence (mCherry channel or calcein channel, see Table S5 for list of 
wavelengths used), and replicate sample number (3 independent samples). 
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
  
supporting data for Figure 3,  
cell cycle  
0
 0
100
1 0
200
2 0
 00
  0
400
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
mCherry cells, mCherry channel; sample1
0
 00
1000
1 00
2000
2 00
 000
  00
4000
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
mCherry cells, calcein channel; sample1
0
 0
100
1 0
200
2 0
 00
  0
400
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
mCherry cells, mCherry channel; sample2
0
 00
1000
1 00
2000
2 00
 000
  00
4000
4 00
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
mCherry cells, calcein channel; sample2
0
 0
100
1 0
200
2 0
 00
  0
400
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
mCherry cells, mCherry channel; sample 
0
 00
1000
1 00
2000
2 00
 000
  00
0 10 20  0 40
 uorescence
collected frac on
mCherry cells, calcein channel; sample 
Figure S43 
 
Figure S43. mRNA and protein time course.  
Synthetic cells were prepared with  nM GFP plasmid and  nM αHL plasmid. Cells were incubated in the 
synthetic cell culture media (see Supplementary text section 4) for 30 hours. The GFP mRNA, DNA and 
GFP fluorescence were measured at indicted time points.  
The lines connecting the dots are visual guides, not fits. Gray dots show individual data points, black 
dots are average of three replicates.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
  
  
0
 
10
0 10 20  0
nM
 me  h 
DNA
0
100
200
0 10 20  0
nM
 me  h 
mRNA
0
1000
2000
 000
0 10 20  0
nM
 me  h 
GFP
supporting data for Figure 3,  
cell cycle  
Figure S44 
 
 
 
Figure S44. Detection of mRNA for each gene after 5 generations of cell cycle.  
Quantification of mRNA for all genes in the synthetic cell genome undergoing 5 generations of cell cycle 
(data for genes not included on the figure 3). See methods section 15 for Rt-qPCR procedure.  
This is a qualitative experiment, indicating presence of detectable amount of mRNA for each gene, not 
the absolute amount of mRNA.  
Bar graphs indicate average value; dots indicate individual data points from 3 replicates.  
Values reported on this figure are Cq values from qPCR experiment – the higher the value, the lower is 
the abundance of the analyte.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
 
  
0
12
24
RF1
HisRS
TyrRS
CysRS
TrpRS
SerRS
ValRS
MetRS
ArgRS
GlnRS
LeuRS
ThrRS
LysRS
AsnRS
IleRS
AlaRS
PheRS 
PheRS 
FMT
EF Ts
IF 
IF1
AspRS
ProRS
GlyRS  
GlyRS  
GluRS
RF 
RF2
RRF
EF G
IF2
Cq
supporting data for Figure 3,  
cell cycle  
Figure S45 
 
 
 
Figure S45. The general scheme of the generation counter.  
The generation counter consists of five pairs of double stranded RNA with short “sticky” single stranded 
overhangs. The oligos are labeled: Gen1t for generation 1, top oligo, and Gen1b for generation 1, 
bottom oligo, etc. Full sequences of RNA oligos used here are in Table S3.  T4 RNA ligase joins the RNA 
into one dsRNA product, in the order directed by the complementary overhangs between the 
generation oligos. The ligation product can then be detected by RT qPCR (see methods section 12). 
The RT qPCR analysis starts with a pair of primers: the forward primer binding the Gen1 oligo and the 
reverse primer binding either the Gen3, Gen4, or Gen5 oligo. 
supporting data for Figure 3, 
generation counter 
Figure S46 
 
 
 
Figure S46. Detection of the generation counter full-length product.  
The full-length generation counter ligation product can only be produced if all the top and bottom 
strands of the gen counter oligos are present in the reaction.  
The graph shows the RT qPCR analysis of the generation counter reaction with all the top and bottom 
strands present in addition to the reactions missing a specific single strand: top (t) or bottom (b) strand 
in each generation oligo. The results are shown as fluorescence of the qPCR reaction at cycle 20, 
because in all the cases of a reaction missing one oligo, there was no Cq call to be made.  
The graphical legend under the graphs illustrates which generation counter oligo is missing from each 
experiment, using the color scheme introduced on the generation counter general scheme on Figure 
S45. 
 
  
0
40
80
120
160RFU  x1000  at cycle 20
supporting data for Figure S45, 
generation counter 
Figure S47 
 
 
Figure S47. Generation counter tests in fusion experiments.  
Two populations of liposomes were prepared: one population encapsulated the bottom oligos for all 
generations (five bottom RNA oligos) and the RNA ligase enzyme. The second liposome population had 
top strands for one or more generations. Most samples contained a matching pair of DNA fusion tags, 
resulting in liposome fusion. In one set of experiments, the DNA tags were not complementary, so no 
fusion occurred. All liposomes in the population with the bottom strands and ligase were labeled with a 
FRET pair of NBD and rhodamine to monitor membrane fusion.  
After the fusion experiment and incubation for six hours, the NBD fluorescence was measured to 
quantify the membrane fusion (panel B) and samples were processed for RT qPCR experiments using a 
forward primer binding sequence at the beginning of the Gen1 oligo and a reverse primer binding in the 
sequence for Gen3, Gen4, or Gen5 (as indicated on the bottom of the figure legend), with Cq results 
shown on panel A.  
Experiments optimizing the ratio of liposome populations and ligase enzyme are shown on Figure S48. 
The dotted red line on panel A is an arbitrary cut-off at a Cq of 14 between distinct clusters of Cq values: 
a low Cq value indicates detection of the complete oligo containing sequence which indicates the fusion 
of the stated number of generation oligos, whereas high Cq values indicates the lack of the desired 
product.  
On panel B, high NBD signal indicates membrane mixing, low NBD signal indicates lack of membrane 
mixing (see Figure S14 for schematic of the FRET experiment). 
                          
 
 
          
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
              
                               
               
                    
      
              
                    
       
supporting data for Figure S45, 
generation counter 
The dots on the top of bars on panel B indicate all individual data points with the bars being the average 
value. Box and whisker data points on panel A are prepared with n=3 independently prepared and 
processed liposome samples. The RT qPCR data on panel A are obtained from the same samples as the 
NBD FRET data on panel B. 
 
  
Figure S48 
 
 
 
Figure S48. Optimizing the ratio of liposome populations and ligase enzyme. 
In all samples except one, all gen counter oligos were present. Ves1 is a liposome population with 
generation counter oligos 1 and   and the ligase,  nM αHL plasmid. Ves2 is liposome population with 
generation counter oligos 2, 3 and 4, 0.6mol% NTA lipids in the membrane. 
  
supporting data for Figure S47, 
generation counter 
Figure S49 
 
 
 
Figure S49. Flow cytometry analysis of fusion reactions, with either T7 αHL or T7Max αHL plasmids.  
The promoter on αHL plasmid was the only difference between the samples, the concentrations, feeder 
liposomes and all other parameters were identical.  
FSC- forward scatter, SSC- side scatter. See Methods section 17 “Flow cytometry”.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
 
 
 
  
supporting data for Figure 4, 
selection 
Figure S50 
 
 
 
Figure S50. Flow cytometry analysis of synthetic cells after 5 generations of growth and division. 
In all samples, cells with T7 and T7Max αHL plasmids started at equal concentration (1 to 1 ratio of T7 
population to T7Max population). The GFP plasmid was present either in samples with T7 αHL plasmid 
or in samples with T7Max αHL plasmid. +cycling label indicates samples that went through 5 generations 
of growth and division. -cycling label indicates samples that were incubated through 5 cycles, but the 
feeder liposomes had no Ni-NTA lipids, so the cells did not undergo feeding and growth. Negative (no 
GFP) and positive (all cells contain GFP) controls for this analysis are shown on Figure S51. 
FSC- forward scatter, SSC- side scatter. See Methods section 17 “Flow cytometry”.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
  
supporting data for Figure 4, 
selection 
Figure S51 
 
 
 
Figure S51. Flow cytometry analysis of positive and negative control samples after 5 generations of 
growth and division. 
Cells prepared like in the generation fusion experiments, but did not undergo cycling and generations. 
The samples either contained GFP plasmid in all cells (labeled GFP +ctrl), or did not contain GFP plasmid 
at all (labeled empty liposome -ctrl).  
FSC- forward scatter, SSC- side scatter. See Methods section 17 “Flow cytometry”.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
  
supporting data for Figure 4, 
selection 
Figure S52 
 
 
 
Figure S52. Phi29 replication for T7 αHL and T7Max αHL plasmids.  
Experiments were prepared according to the manufacturer protocol (NxGen Phi29, Lucigen 30221-2), 
and the resulting DNA was quantified using Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA Assay Kits. Numbers shown on 
this figure represent total yield isolated from the amplification reaction.  
Dots on top of the bars indicate all the individual data points, the bars are the average value. 
 
  
supporting data for Figure 4, 
selection 
Figure S53 
 
Figure S53. Amplicon DNA isolated from samples of competing cells after 5 generations.  
The DNA isolated from generation 5 samples was DpnI digested, and PCR amplified with partial Illumina 
sequencing adapters. The samples contained a mix of T7 and T7Max amplicons that migrated on the gel 
as single band.  
Sample 1: cells with T7 and T7Max αHL plasmids started at equal concentration (1 to 1 ratio of T7 
population to T7Max population). Samples went through 5 generations of growth and division. 
Sample 2: cells with T7 αHL plasmid are 90%, and T7Max are 10% of total concentration (9 to 1 ratio of 
T7 population to T7Max population). Samples went through 5 generations of growth and division. 
Sample 3: cells with T7 and T7Max αHL plasmids started at equal concentration (1 to 1 ratio of T7 
population to T7Max population). Samples were incubated through 5 cycles, but the feeder liposomes 
had no Ni-NTA lipids, so the cells did not undergo feeding and growth. 
Sample 4: cells with T7 αHL plasmid are 90%, and T7Max are 10% of total concentration (9 to 1 ratio of 
T7 population to T7Max population). Samples were incubated through 5 cycles, but the feeder 
liposomes had no Ni-NTA lipids, so the cells did not undergo feeding and growth. 
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
 
  
supporting data for Figure 4, 
selection 
Figure S54 
 
 
 
Figure S54. Example of analysis of NGS data.  
This is data for sample where T7 and T7Max cells started at 1 to 1 ratio and did undergo 5 cycles of 
growth and division. For analysis, T7Max was used as reference sequence, and T7 shows up as deflection 
mutant.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
supporting data for Figure 4, 
selection 
Figure S55 
 
 
 
Figure S55. Selection experiments with normalized metabolic load. 
Raw fluorescence data selection experiments with all cells carrying a fluorescent protein of similar size 
(normalized metabolic load). Experiments performed similarly to those described on panels I-M of 
Figure 4, but both T7 and T7Max cells carried fluorescent protein (GFP or mCherry, as indicated in the 
legend under graph on panel o). After 5 generations, fluorescence of both GFP and mCherry was 
measured (see Table S5 for wavelengths). 
Bar graph shows average value; individual replicates are represented by black dot data points. See Table 
S10 for details of statistical analysis results. P values calculated for GFP and for mCherry compared to 
the negative control: incubation without DNA replication and without feeding and division (symbol ) in 
the weaker promoter T7 cells.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                  
                     
   
     
      
  
   
    
      
    
   
     
   
    
      
    
      
  
          
   
       
***
***
**
**
ns
ns
**
***
***
***
ns
***
ns
***
0
200
400
600
800
RFU
supporting data for Figure 4, 
selection 
Figure S56 
 
 
 
Figure S56. Calibration curves for GFP and mCherry production after 5 generations of synthetic cell 
cycle.  
All generation experiments were started with two populations of cells, carrying either GFP or mCherry 
plasmid at 5nM. After 5 generations of cell cycle fluorescence of both GFP and mCherry was measured. 
Separate control experiments were run without the Phi29 and fusion. The resulting calibration curves 
show the relationship between measured green (GFP) and red (mCherry) fluorescence to relative 
percent of the synthetic cell population carrying that fluorescent protein gene.  
All experiments were done in triplicate, error bars indicate SEM, n=3 independently prepared and 
processed liposome samples. 
This data was collected using PURE pREP.  
supporting data for Figure 4, 
selection 
Figure S57 
 
 
 
Figure S57. Summary of the results of competitive growth. 
Summary of measurements from panels B-E of Figure 5.  
Graphs show difference between T7Max αHL (fast growing) and T7 αHL (slower growing) populations.  
The value on X axis on all graphs represents what percent of the value measured in the sample 
containing T7Max αHL mCherry cells with T7 αHL GFP cells (labeled  ) is the value measured in 
sample containing T7 αHL mCherry cells and T7Max αHL GFP cells (labeled  ) T7Max αHL mCherry 
cells with T7 αHL GFP cells (labeled  )  
For example, a bar graph with GFP fluorescence value of 184 means GFP fluorescence in sample 
containing T7 αHL mCherry cells and T7Max αHL GFP cells (labeled  ) is 184% of the GFP value 
measured in sample of T7Max αHL mCherry cells with T7 αHL GFP cells (labeled  ). 
A: GFP cytometry, B: GFP DNA, C: mCherry DNA, and D: pLD1 “housekeeping gene” DNA.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
 
  
            
            
 
         
        
                                                                 
  
    
       
         
     
    
 
           
0 100 200
 
            
0 100 200
 
            
0 100 200
 
           
0 100 200
  
            
        
 
         
            
      
                                  
    
supporting data for Figure 5,  
competition for resources  
Figure S58 
 
 
 
Figure S58. Number of cells containing GFP or mCherry plasmid during the subsequent generations of 
competition experiments. 
Single cell analysis of abundance of GFP plasmid and mCherry plasmid in synthetic cells undergoing 
rounds of competitive feeding. Two populations of synthetic cells were mixed in each competition 
experiment. One population expressed green marker (GFP) and the other population expressed red 
marker (mCherry). Each experiment was performed in two variants: either mCherry was in the T7Max 
αHL population (symbol ) and GFP was in the T7 αHL population (symbol ), or the reverse with the 
GFP in the T7Max αHL population (symbol ) and mCherry in the T7 αHL population (symbol ). Both 
variants of each experiment had five generations of growth and feeding, with varying amount of feeder 
liposomes. 
After generation 3, 4 and 5 of the experiments with 1x feeder liposomes and with 0.1x feeder liposomes, 
samples were analyzed using single cell protocol (see Methods section 23).  
              
           
                
   
   
   
                                              
              
           
                
     
                                              
    
     
0
 0
60number of cells
0
 0
60number of cells
supporting data for Figure 5,  
competition for resources  
Cells were isolated by dilution. As described in Methods section 23, the only cells used for the analysis 
were the ones with detectable 16S ribosomal RNA – meaning samples that contained a cell, not empty 
samples that did not get a cell due to high dilution. 
The 1x feeder liposomes means the same conditions as cell cycle experiments on figure 3. The 0.1x 
feeder liposomes refer to proportionally less feeder liposomes than in the original 1x conditions. 
Individual data points showing abundance of plasmid in each analyzed cell are on Figure S59 for 1x 
feeding conditions and Figure S60 for 0.1x feeding conditions.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP.  
Figure S59 
 
 
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                      
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                          
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                      
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                          
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                      
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                      
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                          
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                          
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                      
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                          
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                      
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                          
supporting data for Figure 5,  
competition for resources  
Figure S59. Abundance of GFP and mCherry plasmid in each individual cell after competitive growth 
experiments, with 1x feeder liposomes. 
Individual data points showing abundance of either mCherry or GFP plasmid in each of the analyzed 
cells, for competitive growth experiments as described on Figure 5. This figure shows individual data 
points for summary Figure S58. 
Sample labels indicate: 
1x feeding – 1x feeding liposomes, the same feeding concentration conditions as cell cycle experiments 
on Figure 3.  
T7Mcherry – the T7Max cells contained mCherry 
T7MGFP – the T7Max cells contained GFP 
T7cherry – the T7 cells contained mCherry 
T7GFP – the T7 cells contained GFP 
GFP, green bars, indicate measurements of GFP plasmid  
mCherry, red bars, indicate measurements of mCherry plasmid  
gen3, gen4 and gen5 – indicate generation after which the samples were collected.  
The Y axis on all graphs on Figure S59 and Figure S60 is set to the same scale, to enable direct visual 
comparison of plasmid abundance.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
  
Figure S60 
 
 
 
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                        
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                        
    
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                        
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                        
    
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                        
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                        
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                        
    
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                        
    
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                        
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                        
    
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                        
 
 
  
       
          
             
                                        
    
supporting data for Figure 5,  
competition for resources  
Figure S60. Abundance of GFP and mCherry plasmid in each individual cell after competitive growth 
experiments, with 0.1x feeder liposomes. 
Individual data points showing abundance of either mCherry or GFP plasmid in each of the analyzed 
cells, for competitive growth experiments as described on Figure 5. This figure shows individual data 
points for summary Figure S58. 
Sample labels indicate: 
0.1x feeding – 0.1x feeding liposomes, the concentration of feeding liposomes that is 10% of the 
concentration used in conditions described as cell cycle experiments on Figure 3.  
T7Mcherry – the T7Max cells contained mCherry 
T7MGFP – the T7Max cells contained GFP 
T7cherry – the T7 cells contained mCherry 
T7GFP – the T7 cells contained GFP 
GFP, green bars, indicate measurements of GFP plasmid  
mCherry, red bars, indicate measurements of mCherry plasmid  
gen3, gen4 and gen5 – indicate generation after which the samples were collected.  
The Y axis on all graphs on Figure S59 and Figure S60 is set to the same scale, to enable direct visual 
comparison of plasmid abundance.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP.  
Figure S61 
 
supporting data for Figure 5, 
competition for resources 
 
Figure S61. Flow cytometry data from feeding competition experiments. 
sample 1, T7 GFP, T7Max mCherry, 1x feeding 
sample 2, T7Max GFP, T7 mCherry, 1x feeding 
sample 3, T7 GFP, T7Max mCherry, 0.5x feeding 
sample 4, T7Max GFP, T7 mCherry, 0.5x feeding 
sample 5, T7 GFP, T7Max mCherry, 0.25x feeding 
sample 6, T7Max GFP, T7 mCherry, 0.25x feeding 
sample 7, T7 GFP, T7Max mCherry, 0.1x feeding 
sample 8, T7Max GFP, T7 mCherry, 0.1x feeding 
FSC- forward scatter, SSC- side scatter. See Methods section 17 “Flow cytometry”.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP.  
Figure S62 
 
 
Figure S62. Fluorescence values for mCherry and GFP competitive feeding experiments. 
Absolute fluorescence values for mCherry (red bars) and GFP (green bars) in competitive feeding 
experiments. Y axis is RFU (relative fluorescent units). Dots on top of the bar graphs indicate individual 
values of three replicates. 
Statistical analysis shows P values for each experiment compared to 1x feeder liposome conditions. ns = 
P > 0.0 ; * = P ≤ 0.0 , ** = P ≤ 0.01, *** = P ≤ 0.001. 
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
  
              
           
                
   
     
      
     
**
**
*** *
*
***
******
***
*** ******
***
***
0
200
400
600
800
1000RFU
supporting data for Figure 5, 
competition for resources 
Figure S63 
 
 
 
Figure S63. Flow cytometry of synthetic cells before and after division. 
Genetically encoded division experiments were performed, with synthetic cells expressing tagged 
membrane protein αHL; streptavidin and linker are added on the outside of the cells, binding to the αHL 
tag on the surface of the cells. The streptavidin induces curvature in the membrane, leading to cell 
division. Two systems were tested: αHL His tagged with Ni-NTA linker to bind streptavidin, and αHL FLAG 
tagged with biotin conjugated FLAG antibody to bind streptavidin. 
This experiment was performed by preparing synthetic cells with αHL and GFP plasmid (the dividing 
cells) and mixing them 70 :  0 with “dark” cells, liposomes with PURE system but without any plasmid. 
This was done because for cytometry experiments, cells need to be diluted to certain lipid density, so 
measuring ratio of “dark” to “GFP” cells was more reliable way to calculate how many cells divided. 
The starting ratio was 70% cell had GFP. After division, presumably more cells had GFP (higher % of cells 
with GFP), which is the information that is not going to be lost during dilutions because both GFP and 
“dark” cells will be diluted equally.  
If we only used GFP cells, it would be difficult to estimate how many new GFP cells were made, because 
during dilution all samples would be brought to similar lipid density.  
Two conditions were tested for both Flag and His system. The synthetic cells in each experiment were: 
Flag system 
No division: αHL FLAG present, streptavidin absent, biotin FLAG antibody linker absent.  
Division: αHL FLAG present, streptavidin present, biotin FLAG antibody linker present.  
His system 
No division: αHL His tagged present, streptavidin absent, Ni-NTA linker absent.  
Division: αHL His tagged present, streptavidin present, Ni-NTA linker present.  
Dots on top of the bars indicate all the individual data points, the bars are the average value. 
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
  
 0
70
90
No division Division
% cells containing GFP
Flag system
 
 0
70
90
No division Division
% cells containing GFP
His system
 
supporting data for Figure 6,  
genetically encoded growth  
Figure S64 
 
Figure S64. Size of synthetic cells after genetically encoded division using His tag system. 
Individual data points for each independent replicate experiment for size analysis after division (Figure 
6B). Each of the three individual independent replicates (the black dot if an individual data point) is an 
average of six DLS measurements. 
Sample 1: αHL His tagged present, streptavidin absent, Ni-NTA linker absent; no division is expected.  
Sample 2: αHL His tagged present, streptavidin absent, Ni-NTA linker present; no division is expected.  
Sample 3: αHL His tagged present, streptavidin present, Ni-NTA linker absent; no division is expected.  
Sample 4: αHL His tagged absent, streptavidin present, Ni-NTA linker present; no division is expected.  
Sample 5: αHL His tagged present, streptavidin present, Ni-NTA linker present; division is expected.  
Dots on top of the bars indicate all the individual data points, the bars are the average value. 
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
  
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1 2  4  
average diameter  nm size analysis a er division
supporting data for Figure 6, 
genetically encoded division 
Figure S65 
 
Figure S65. Size of synthetic cells after genetically encoded division using FLAG tag system. 
Individual data points for each independent replicate experiment for size analysis after division (Figure 
6C). Each of the three individual independent replicates (the black dot if an individual data point) is an 
average of six DLS measurements. 
Sample 1: αHL FLAG present, streptavidin absent, biotin FLAG antibody linker absent; no division is 
expected.  
Sample 2: αHL FLAG present, streptavidin absent, biotin FLAG antibody linker present; no division is 
expected.  
Sample 3: αHL FLAG present, streptavidin present, biotin FLAG antibody linker absent; no division is 
expected.  
Sample 4: αHL FLAG absent, streptavidin present, biotin FLAG antibody linker present; no division is 
expected.  
Sample 5: αHL FLAG present, streptavidin present, biotin FLAG antibody linker present; division is 
expected.  
Dots on top of the bars indicate all the individual data points, the bars are the average value. 
This data was collected using PURE pREP.  
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1 2  4  
average diameter  nm size analysis a er division
supporting data for Figure 6, 
genetically encoded division 
Figure S66 
 
Figure S66. DNA abundance in synthetic cells after genetically encoded division on beads with the His 
tagged αHL. 
Individual data points for each independent replicate experiment of measurement of amount of αHL 
DNA in T7Max synthetic cells after division on beads (Figure 6). 
Sample 1: αHL present, streptavidin absent, Ni-NTA linker absent; no division is expected.  
Sample 2: αHL present, streptavidin absent, Ni-NTA linker present; no division is expected.  
Sample 3: αHL present, streptavidin present, Ni-NTA linker absent; no division is expected.  
Sample 4: αHL absent, streptavidin present, Ni-NTA linker present; no division is expected.  
Sample 5: αHL present, streptavidin present, Ni-NTA linker present; division is expected.  
Dots on top of the bars indicate all the individual data points, the bars are the average value. 
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
0
 
6
1 2  4  
nM plasmid
free o  beads
0
10
20
1 2  4  
nM plasmid
a ached to beads
supporting data for Figure 6, 
genetically encoded division 
Figure S67 
 
Figure S67. DNA abundance in synthetic cells after competitive genetically encoded division on beads 
with the His tagged αHL. 
Individual data points for each independent replicate experiment of measurement of amount of unique 
DNA marker in T7 and T7Max synthetic cells after competitive division on beads (Figure 6). 
The unique DNA marker was a plasmid not expressed inside synthetic cells (a gene under control of 
mammalian CMV promoter), it was used here only to mark otherwise identical synthetic cells, since T7 
and T7Max promoters are similar enough that it’s difficult to reliably differentiate them with qPCR 
primers. See methods section 21 for details.  
Sample 1: T7 cells present, T7Max cells present; no division is expected.  
Sample 2: T7 cells present, T7Max cells absent; division is expected.  
Sample 3: T7 cells absent, T7Max cells present; division is expected.  
Sample 4: T7 cells present, T7Max cells present; division is expected.  
Light blue: T7 cells, darker blue: T7Max cells.  
Dots on top of the bars indicate all the individual data points, the bars are the average value. 
P values were calculated for samples compared to “Sample 1” T7 cells present, T7Max cells present; no 
division is expected. ns = P > 0.0 ; * = P ≤ 0.0 , ** = P ≤ 0.01, *** = P ≤ 0.001. 
Exact P values are listed in Table S12. This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
0
4
8
1 2  4
nM plasmid
free o  beads
0
10
20
1 2  4
nM plasmid
a ached to beads
 ns     
ns ns ns ns ns ns
supporting data for Figure 6, 
genetically encoded division 
Figure S68 
 
Figure S68. Individual data points for genetically encoded growth and division. 
Samples are in the same order as corresponding box and whiskers plots on Figure 6: 
Sample 1: DNA replication, growth, division 
Sample 2: DNA replication, no growth, division 
Sample 3: DNA replication, growth, no division 
Sample 4: DNA replication, no growth, no division 
Sample 5: no DNA replication, growth, division 
Sample 6: no DNA replication, no growth, division 
Sample 7: no DNA replication, growth, no division 
Sample 8: no DNA replication, no growth, no division 
Bar graphs represent average value, dots are individual data points for each replicate.  
Statistical analysis: P values are listed in Table S12.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP.  
0
1 
 0
1 2  4  6 7 8
nM
genera on counter, a ached to beads
0
2
4
1 2  4  6 7 8
nM
genera on counter, free o  beads
0
4
8
1 2  4  6 7 8
nM
new aHL, a ached to beads
0
1
2
1 2  4  6 7 8
nM
new aHL, free o  beads
0
8
16
1 2  4  6 7 8
nM
total aHL, a ached to beads
0
1
2
1 2  4  6 7 8
nM
total aHL, free o  beads
supporting data for Figure 6, 
genetically encoded division 
Figure S69 
 
 
Figure S69. Detection of each plasmid in the synthetic cell genome after growth and division. 
qPCR analysis of each of the synthetic cell genome plasmids in “daughter” cell fraction of synthetic cells, 
the fraction that was collected off the magnetic beads, after growth and division. Those cells had DNA 
replication via Phi29.  
The αHL quantification did not differentiate between His and FLAG labeled proteins. Because some 
other proteins in the genome are also His tagged, it was impossible to create a qPCR primer for His tag 
that would be specific only for the αHL plasmid. Therefore, here we quantified αHL gene in the untagged 
region, so the results demonstrate combined quantification for both FLAG tagged and His tagged αHL 
plasmids.  
The bar graphs represent average value, dots on top of the bar graphs indicate individual values of three 
replicates.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP.  
supporting data for Figure 6, 
genetically encoded division 
Figure S70 
 
Figure S70. Genetically encoded division using FLAG system. 
A: Synthetic cells expressing FLAG tagged αHL are immobilized on magnetic beads. Streptavidin and 
biotin conjugated anti-FLAG antibody linker are added to the outside of the cells. If division occurs, the 
daughter cells are free to separate from the beads. After the experiment, free synthetic cells are 
collected separately from the synthetic cells that remained on the beads.  
B and C: quantification of αHL DNA in synthetic cells freed from the beads (the “daughter cells”, panel B) 
and cells that remained attached to the beads (the “parent” cells, panel C), in experiments excluding one 
of the essential division components (αHL, streptavidin or the biotin conjugated anti-FLAG antibody 
linker), and with all division elements present. Individual data points are in Figure S71.  
D and E: Competitive division. Synthetic cells containing αHL under “slow” promoter T7 and αHL under 
“fast” promoter T7Max are dividing in the same reaction. Samples were analyzed for the presence of 
unique DNA marker (different for T7 and T7Max cells). Label “division” indicates either presence of 
streptavidin and biotin conjugated anti-FLAG antibody linker (division label “yes”), or absence of both 
streptavidin and linker (labeled “no” division). In each experiment, the sample contained either a mix of 
both synthetic cells containing T7 and T7Max αHL in equal amounts, or only one of the populations (only 
T7 or only T7Max). After incubation and division, unique DNA marker was quantified, identifying T7 and 
T7Max populations in “daughter” cells free off the beads (panel D) and in cells that remained attached 
to beads (panel E). Individual data points are in Figure S72. 
This data was collected using PURE pREP. 
 
 
               
                  
         
 
 
               
                  
0
4
8nM
0
10
20nM
   
   
0
 
6nM
0
10
20
nM
 
  
 
  
                             
                                
     
  
                                           
supporting data for Figure 6, 
genetically encoded division 
Figure S71 
 
Figure S71. DNA abundance in synthetic cells after genetically encoded division on beads with the 
FLAG tagged αHL. 
Individual data points for each independent replicate experiment of measurement of amount of αHL 
DNA in T7Max synthetic cells after division on beads (Figure S70). 
Sample 1: αHL present, streptavidin absent, biotin conjugated anti-FLAG antibody linker absent; no 
division is expected.  
Sample 2: αHL present, streptavidin absent, biotin conjugated anti-FLAG antibody linker present; no 
division is expected.  
Sample 3: αHL present, streptavidin present, biotin conjugated anti-FLAG antibody linker absent; no 
division is expected.  
Sample 4: αHL absent, streptavidin present, biotin conjugated anti-FLAG antibody linker present; no 
division is expected.  
Sample 5: αHL present, streptavidin present, biotin conjugated anti-FLAG antibody linker present; 
division is expected.  
Dots on top of the bars indicate all the individual data points, the bars are the average value. 
This data was collected using PURE pREP.  
supporting data for Figure S70, 
genetically encoded division 
Figure S72 
 
Figure S72. DNA abundance in synthetic cells after competitive genetically encoded division on beads 
with the FLAG tagged αHL. 
Individual data points for each independent replicate experiment of measurement of amount of unique 
DNA marker in T7 and T7Max synthetic cells after competitive division on beads (Figure S70). 
The unique DNA marker was a plasmid not expressed inside synthetic cells (a gene under control of 
mammalian CMV promoter), it was used here only to mark otherwise identical synthetic cells, since T7 
and T7Max promoters are similar enough that it’s difficult to reliably differentiate them with qPCR 
primers. See methods section 21 for details.  
Sample 1: T7 cells present, T7Max cells present; no division is expected.  
Sample 2: T7 cells present, T7Max cells absent; division is expected.  
Sample 3: T7 cells absent, T7Max cells present; division is expected.  
Sample 4: T7 cells present, T7Max cells present; division is expected.  
Light blue: T7 cells, darker blue: T7Max cells.  
Dots on top of the bars indicate all the individual data points, the bars are the average value. 
This data was collected using PURE pREP.  
supporting data for Figure S70, 
genetically encoded division 
0
4
8
1 2  4
nM plasmid
free o  beads
0
10
20
1 2  4
nM plasmid
a ached to beads
Figure S73 
 
 
 
  
supporting data for Figure 6, 
genetically encoded division 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S73. Fluorescent microscopy of synthetic cell undergoing a cycle of growth and division (His tag 
mediated growth, Flag mediated division).  
The membrane of synthetic cell is labeled with Rhodamine. Scale bar is 20µm. The larger image is the 
entire field of view, the smaller image insert is zooming in on the cell of interest. This data was collected 
using PURE pREP.  

Figure S74 
 
 
 
Figure S74. Measuring interference and cross-reactivity of His and Flag based division systems.  
The αHL plasmid abundance measured after 12h division experiment, performed according to protocol 
described in Methods section 21, with samples on beads according to protocol described in Methods 
section 20, under conditions indicated below in sample description.  
All samples contained streptavidin.  
Sample 1: Cells with αHL-FLAG and biotin FLAG antibody linker. Division is expected.  
Sample 2: Cells with αHL-His and Ni-NTA linker. Division is expected. 
Sample 3: Interference test - cells with αHL-FLAG and both biotin FLAG antibody and Ni-NTA linkers. 
Division is expected, if the His and Flag systems don’t interfere with each other.  
Sample 4: Interference test - cells with αHL-His and both biotin FLAG antibody and Ni-NTA linkers. 
Division is expected, if the His and Flag systems don’t interfere with each other. 
Sample 5: Cross-reactivity test - cells with αHL-FLAG and Ni-NTA linker. Division is not expected if the His 
and Flag systems don’t cross-react. 
Sample 6: Cross-reactivity test - cells with αHL-His and biotin FLAG antibody linker. Division is not 
expected if the His and Flag systems don’t cross-react. 
Bar graphs represent average values; dots represent individual data points.  
This data was collected using PURE pREP.  
0
2
4
6
1 2  4  6
nM
free o  beads
0
 
10
1 
20
2 
1 2  4  6
nM
a ached to beads
supporting data for Figure 6,  
genetically encoded division  
Figure S75 
 
Figure S75. Calibration curves for qPCR experiments. 
Each data point is average of three experiments, error bars show SEM.  
y =  14.999x   24.9 6
R  = 0.999 
0
10
20
 0
40
 0
 1.1  0.6  0.1 0.4 0.9
Cq
lognM
GFP DpnI qPCR
y =  8.9 97x   26.6 8
R  = 0.9917
0
10
20
 0
40
 1.1  0.1 0.9 1.9
Cq
lognM
GFP RT qPCR
y =  1 .769x   22.844
R  = 0.9964
0
10
20
 0
40
 1.1  0.6  0.1 0.4 0.9 1.4
Cq
lognM
aHL DpnI qPCR
y =  9.11  x   26.91
R  = 0.99 1
0
10
20
 0
40
 0
 1.1  0.1 0.9 1.9
Cq
lognM
aHL  RT qPCR
y =  9.2  1x   27.087
R  = 0.99 2
0
10
20
 0
40
 0
 1.1  0.1 0.9 1.9
Cq
lognM
Gen Counter   RT  qPCR w/F Primer
y =  8.877x   26.819
R  = 0.9947
0
10
20
 0
40
 1.1  0.1 0.9 1.9
Cq
lognM
Gen Counter 4 RT  qPCR w/F Primer
y =  9.0166x   26.714
R  = 0.994 
0
10
20
 0
40
 0
 1.1  0.1 0.9 1.9
Cq
lognM
Gen Counter   RT  qPCR w/F Primer
y =  1 .744x   26.879
R  = 0.99  
0
10
20
 0
40
 0
 1.1  0.1 0.9 1.9
Cq
lognM
pREP DpnI qPCR
y =  1 .91 x   2 .607
R  = 0.997
0
10
20
 0
40
 0
 1.1  0.1 0.9 1.9
Cq
lognM
T7RNAP DpnI qPCR
y =  12.927x   21. 1 
R  = 0.997
0
10
20
 0
40
 1.1  0.1 0.9 1.9
Cq
lognM
pLD1 DpnI qPCR
y =  1 .2 x   22.1 9
R  = 0.9981
0
10
20
 0
40
 1.1  0.1 0.9 1.9
Cq
lognM
pLD2 DpnI qPCR
y =  11.682x   19. 27
R  = 0.9904
0
10
20
 0
40
 1.1  0.1 0.9 1.9
Cq
lognM
pLD  DpnI qPCR
y =  8. 217x   1 .909
R  = 0.989 
0
 
10
1 
20
2 
 0
 1.1  0.1 0.9 1.9
Cq
lognM
T7 division marker CMV  GFP 
y =  8.49  x   16. 06
R  = 0.9929
0
 
10
1 
20
2 
 0
 1.1  0.1 0.9 1.9
Cq
lognM
T7Max division marker CMV  mCherry
y =  6.72 6x   24.228
R  = 0.9866
0
 
10
1 
20
2 
 0
  
 1.1  0.1 0.9 1.9
16S ribosomal RNA
y =  11. 77x   20.614
R  = 0.9967
0
 
10
1 
20
2 
 0
  
 1.1  0.6  0.1 0.4 0.9
mCherry plasmid
y =  7.90 8x   2 . 46
R  = 0.9904
0
10
20
 0
40
 1.1  0.1 0.9 1.9
mCherry RT qPCR
supporting data for all qPCR data 
Figure S76 
 
 
 
Figure S76. FRET calibration curves. 
Calibration for NBD fluorescence in NBD – rhodamine FRET experiments, and Cy5 fluorescence for Cy5 – 
Cy7 FRET experiments. Error bars indicate SEM, n=3 independently prepared and processed liposome 
samples. 
 
 
 
  
supporting data for all FRET data 
Supplementary tables 
 
 
Table of content of supplementary tables 
 
Table S1: Summary of major results 
Table S2: Sequences of primers used in this work 
Table S3: Sequences of RNA generation counter 
Table S4: Summary of trends in mRNA, DNA, and generation counter abundance in cell cycle 
Table S5: Wavelengths used in fluorescent measurements in this work 
Table S6: Summary of the composition of the whole 90.3kbp genome of the synthetic cell 
Table S7: DNA sequences of synthetic cell genome translation factor genes 
Table S8: Conversion of plasmid concentration to plasmid copy number 
Table S9: Statistical analysis of cell cycle data 
Table S10: Statistical analysis of data for selection experiments  
Table S11: Statistical analysis of data for two populations of synthetic cells mixed in each competition 
experiment 
Table S12: Statistical analysis of data for synthetic cells growth and division 
 
 
  
Table S1 
 
Genetically encoded feeding and growth (TxTl)  
Protein expression inside synthetic cell leads to fusion and 
membrane mixing 
Figure 2B 
Protein expression inside synthetic cell leads to fusion and lumen 
mixing 
Figure 2C, 2D-M, S13 
Microscopy after feeding and growth Figure 2M 
Expression of αHL leads to small molecule leakage  Figure S3, Figure S9 
Small molecules leak from liposomes during protein mediated 
fusion  
Figure S23 
  
Synthetic cell media (TxTl)  
External media composition affects protein expression in 
synthetic cells 
Figure S15 
  
Cell cycle (PURE)  
New DNA is made in DNA replication reactions through 5 cycles of 
growth and division 
Figure 3A, 3E and 3I 
Genes are transcribed inside synthetic cells through the 5 
generations of growth and division 
Figure 3B, 3F and 3J 
Each gene from the 90kB genome is transcribed in daughter cells 
after 5 generations  
Figure S44 
Removing feeder vesicles after each cycle doesn’t significantly 
change the results  
Figure S25 
All parts of the 90kB genome can be found in daughter cells after 
5 generations of cell cycle 
Single cells: Figure 3O-P 
In bulk: Figure S28 and S32 
Microscopy after 5 generations Figure 3M-N and S31 
Liposomes remain stable after 5 cycles Figure S35 
Fusion efficiency decreases with each generation  Figure S36 
There is no significant fusion between synthetic cells (as opposite 
to fusion with feeder liposomes) 
Figure S38 
There are more cells after each generation  Figure S39 
  
Selection and competition (PURE)  
Fusion efficiency is controlled by the amount of αHL Figure 4A-H 
After 5 generations of growth and division, faster growing cells 
make up higher percentage of the population 
Figure 4I-O 
Faster growing cells fuse with more feeder liposomes Figure 5B-J 
After competitive growth, there is more cells containing the 
“winner” plasmid (not just more DNA) in faster growing samples 
Figure S58 
If feeder liposomes are limited, strong growers fuse with more 
feeders and grow significantly faster than weak growers 
Figure 5B-J 
  
  
Genetically encoded division (PURE)  
Average diameter of the liposomes decreases after division 
induced by αHL expression 
Figure 6B and 6C 
Microscopy of protein induced division  Figure 6D, 6S and S73 
When cells are immobilized, after division daughter cells get free 
off the beads 
Figure 6E-G 
Cells making more growth inducing αHL protein produce more 
daughter cells  
Figure 6H-I 
Flow cytometry shows more liposomes after division Figure S63 
Cells can fuse with feeder liposomes and then divide, combining 
genetically encoded feeding and division 
Figure 6J-P 
After genetically encoded growth and division each plasmid can 
be detected in daughter cell population 
Figure S69  
 
The FLAG based division system works comparably to the His 
system  
Figure S70 
There is no cross-reactivity or interference between His and FLAG 
based division systems  
Figure S74 
 
 
 
Table S1: Summary of major results with reference to figures containing the information.  
 
 
  
Table S2 
 
Description Sequence 
αHL Forward  GAAGGTGCTAACAAAAGTGGTTTAGCC 
αHL Reverse  TCATCACCAGTAACATTACCGTTGAATCCATA 
GFP Forward  AACTGTTTACCGGCGTTGTGCCGATTCT 
GFP Reverse  ACTAAAACACTGAACGCCATAGGTCAGGGTGG 
Gen counter Forward  GAGCCTCATAACGCGTCCGGC 
Gen counter Gen3 Reverse  ACGGTCCATCTCAGGCCATTCGAT 
Gen counter Gen4 Reverse  CGCACCCGTTTCCGGATCGG 
Gen counter Gen5 Reverse  TTTCGTTCGCTCCCGGCTGATCC 
NGS sequencing F ACACTCTTTCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCTAACGCCAGCAACGCGGC 
NGS sequencing R GACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCTGCCACCTCCGTGGTGATGGT 
pREP Forward GCAGGCAGTGACAGTCTAAA 
pREP Reverse GGCGTATCTCACTTCCTTATCG 
T7RNAP Forward GTTCAGGACATCTACGGGATTG  
T7RNAP Reverse CATCGGTCACGGTAACTACTTC 
RF1 Forward TTAGCGGTGATGGTGTGTATG 
RF1 Reverse TATGAATACGACCCTGCGATTC 
HisRS Forward GGCCTCGAACGTCTTGTATT 
HisRS Reverse TAGCCGCAGATTGTGTATCAG 
TyrRS Forward CGCCCTGGAAGAAGAAGATAAA 
TyrRS Reverse GCTGAACAGGCATTCGGTAATA 
CysRS Forward CTGCGTTTCCTCGGCTATAA 
CysRS Reverse ATCCACCATCGCCACAAA 
TrpRS Forward ACGCTGGTCTGTTTGACTATC 
TrpRS Reverse GAGGTGCTGTTTCTGGTCTT 
SerRS Forward GCATGGCTACAGTGAGAACTAT 
SerRS Reverse ACTGGTGTCTGCTTCTTCTTC 
ValRS Forward GGAGTTCAACCAGACCATCAA 
ValRS Reverse GGTTCCAGGTGAACTCATACAG 
MetRS Forward GTCTCGCGGCACCTTTATTA 
MetRS Reverse CGAAGAGAGTTTCGCAGTGTAG 
ArgRS Forward CTACATCTTCGACTGGGACAAC 
ArgRS Reverse TACGGAACACGGACAATACAC 
GlnRS Forward GTCTGGTGCTGGGTAAAGAA 
GlnRS Reverse GGTATCGGCGTCATAAGTACAG 
LeuRS Forward CCCGGAAGAGATAGAATCCAAAG 
LeuRS Reverse GGAAGCATAGACAGGCAGTAAT 
ThrRS Forward GACCTCCGCAATGAGAAGATT 
ThrRS Reverse TGCCTGATTCCACCTCTTTATC 
LysRS Forward GGGAATTGGTATCGACCGTATG 
LysRS Reverse CATCGCCGGGAACAGAATAA 
AsnRS Forward TCGCTGAACGCGTAGATAAAG 
AsnRS Reverse GGTCACTGCGTCGGTATAATC 
IleRS Forward CGCTACCGTTGCAGACTATAA 
IleRS Reverse ACTTCTCACCTTCGGCTTTAC 
AlaRS Forward GGTGCTGAAGACTGAAGAAGAG 
AlaRS Reverse CATCCAGCGTATCACCAGAAA 
PheRSα Forward GAAGTGGACGTCATGGGTAAA 
PheRSα Reverse CGAAGGCGAAACCAGAGTAA 
PheRSβ Forward AGTTGGCGTAAATCAGGTAGTT 
PheRSβ Reverse GCTTATGGCGAGGCTCTTATAC 
FMT Forward TACGCCGAGAAGTTGAGTAAAG 
FMT Reverse CTCATTGGCCATGGATTGAAAG 
EF-Ts Forward GCGTAAGTCCGGTGCTATTA 
EF-Ts Reverse CTTCCAGAATGATGCCGTAGT 
IF3 Forward CCCAGGAAGTTCGCTTAACA 
IF3 Reverse ACTAAGTCTACTCCGGCTTCT 
IF1 Forward CCACCACGCGAAAGAAGATA 
IF1 Reverse GTCAGGATCCGGATGTAGTTT 
AspRS Forward CAGCGTGTCTGATGACTGAA 
AspRS Reverse GTGGTGGTGGTGGTTATTCT 
ProRS Forward CCGATGAACATGCACAAATCC 
ProRS Reverse ATCCAGCAGCACTTCGATAC 
GlyRS α Forward GACATCCGTTTCGTGGAAGATA 
GlyRS α Reverse CACCAACCTGCTGGAAGTAA 
GlyRS β Forward GAGCGTCTGACTACCGATAAAG 
GlyRS β Reverse CCAGAGAAGTCGCAACCATATT 
GluRS Forward CTGGAAGTGGGTATGGGTAAAG 
GluRS Reverse GGTCTTACCGATTGCGTGAA 
RF3 Forward CGTAGAAGCGAGCGAAGATAAG 
RF3 Reverse CGGACACCACACGCATAAA 
RF2 Forward GAGAAACAGGCGATGGAAGATA 
RF2 Reverse CGGGAGTCATCAAGGACATAAG 
RRF Forward GCAAGCGTAACGGTAGAAGA 
RRF Reverse CCAAGATCGGACGCCATAAT 
EF-G Forward GGTATCCAGGAACAGCTGAAA 
EF-G Reverse GAGGAGTCAACGTCATGGTAAG 
IF2 Forward TGAAGAAGCACGTCGTATGG 
IF2 Reverse GGCGAGCATGTTGAGAAGTA 
16S RNA Forward ATTAGATACCCTGGTAGTCCACGCC 
16S RNA Reverse CGTCATCCCCACCTTCCTCC 
 
Table S2: Sequences of primers used in this work. 
  
Table S3 
 
generation top bottom 
1 GAGCCUCAUAACGCGUCCGGC /5Phos/CGCGAGGCCGGACGCGU
UAUGAGGCUC 
2 /5Phos/CUCGCGCCCAGGGUA
CAUUUGGAC 
/5Phos/GAUACUGUCCAAAUGUA
CCCUGGG 
3 /5Phos/AGUAUCGAAUGGCCU
GAGAUGGAC 
/5Phos/GUGACGGUCCAUCUCAG
GCCAUUC 
4 /5Phos/CGUCACACCGAUCCG
GAAACGGGU 
/5Phos/CCGCGCACCCGUUUCCG
GAUCGGU 
5 /5Phos/GCGCGGAUCAGCCGG
GAGCGAACGAAA 
UUUCGUUCGCUCCCGGCUGAU 
 
Table S3: Sequences of RNA generation counter. Complementary overhangs are underlined.  
/5Phos/ is a 5' Phosphorylation modification. 
 
 
 
  
Table S4 
 
  mRNA new DNA GFP 
fluorescence 
Generation counter 
  αHL GFP αHL GFP Gen3 Gen4 Gen5 
Three 
generations 
Phi29, fusion  ~ ~ + + + + – – 
no Phi29, fusion  ~ ~ - - + + – – 
Phi29, no fusion  ~ ~ + + + – – – 
no Phi29, no fusion  ~ ~ – – – – – – 
Four 
generations 
Phi29, fusion  ~ ~ + + + + + – 
no Phi29, fusion  ~ ~ – – + + + – 
Phi29, no fusion  ~ ~ + + + – – – 
no Phi29, no fusion  ~ ~ – – – – – – 
Five 
generations 
Phi29, fusion  ~ ~ + + + + + + 
no Phi29, fusion  ~ ~ – – + + + + 
Phi29, no fusion  ~ ~ + + + – – – 
no Phi29, no fusion  ~ ~ – – – – – – 
 
Table S4: Summary of trends in mRNA, DNA, and generation counter abundance in cell cycle, for data 
presented on Figure 3. 
Labels indicate:  
~ The result was ambiguous (no clear trend)  
– The analyte was not detected 
+ The analyte was detected 
 
 
 
  

Table S5 
 
 Excitation Emission  
GFP and calcein 488nm 507nm 
mCherry 587nm 610nm 
NBD  463nm 536nm 
Cy5  635nm 665nm 
Cy5.5 684nm 710nm 
 
Table S5: Wavelengths used in fluorescent measurements in this work. 
  
Table S6 
 
plasmid size Proteins encoded   
pREP 4.6kbp Phi29 polymerase20 
pLD1 30.1kbp RF1, HisRS, TyrRS, CysRS, TrpRS, SerRS, ValRS, MetRS, ArgRS, GlnRS, 
LeuRS, ThrRS, LysRS65 
pLD2 20.0kbp AsnRS, IleRS, AlaRS, PheRS1, PheRS2, MTF, EF-Ts, IF3, IF165 
pLD3 23.4kbp AspRS, ProRS, GlyRS1, GlyRS2, GluRS, RF3, RF2, RRF, EF-G, IF265 
GFP 2.5kbp Green fluorescent protein (GFP) 
T7RNAP 5.4kbp T7 RNA polymerase89 
αHL 4.3kbp alpha hemolysin (αHL)  
 
Table S6: Summary of the composition of the whole 90.3kbp genome of the synthetic cell.  
 
  
Table S7 
 
Translational release factor 1, abbreviation: RF1, DNA sequence: 
atgaagccttctatcgttgccaaactggaagccctgcatgaacgccatgaagaagttcaggcgttgctgggtgacgcgcaaactatcgccgacca
ggaacgttttcgcgcattatcacgcgaatatgcgcagttaagtgatgtttcgcgctgttttaccgactggcaacaggttcaggaagatatcgaaacc
gcacagatgatgctcgatgatcctgaaatgcgtgagatggcgcaggatgaactgcgcgaagctaaagaaaaaagcgagcaactggaacagcaa
ttacaggttctgttactgccaaaagatcctgatgacgaacgtaacgccttcctcgaagtccgagccggaaccggcggcgacgaagcggcgctgttc
gcgggcgatctgttccgtatgtacagccgttatgccgaagcccgccgctggcgggtagaaatcatgagcgccagcgagggtgaacatggtggttat
aaagagatcatcgccaaaattagcggtgatggtgtgtatggtcgtctgaagtttgaatccggcggtcatcgcgtgcaacgtgttcctgctacggaat
cgcagggtcgtattcatacttctgcttgtaccgttgcggtaatgccagaactgcctgacgcagaactgccggacatcaacccagcagatttacgcat
tgatactttccgctcgtcaggggcgggtggtcagcacgttaacaccaccgattcggcaattcgtattactcacttgccgaccgggattgttgttgaat
gtcaggacgaacgttcacaacataaaaacaaagctaaagcactttctgttctcggtgctcgcatccacgctgctgaaatggcaaaacgccaacag
gccgaagcgtctacccgtcgtaacctgctggggagtggcgatcgcagcgaccgtaaccgtacttacaacttcccgcaggggcgcgttaccgatcac
cgcatcaacctgacgctctaccgcctggatgaagtgatggaaggtaagctggatatgctgattgaaccgattatccaggaacatcaggccgacca
actggcggcgttgtccgagcaggaacaccaccaccaccaccactaa  
His-tRNA synthetase, abbreviation: HisRS, DNA sequence: 
atggcaaaaaacattcaagccattcgcggcatgaacgattacctgcctggcgaaacggccatctggcagcgcattgaaggcacactgaaaaacg
tgctcggcagctacggttacagtgaaatccgcttgccgattgtagagcagaccccgctattcaaacgtgcgattggtgaagtcaccgacgtggttg
aaaaagagatgtacacctttgaggatcgcaatggcgacagcctgactctgcgccctgaagggacggcgggctgtgtacgcgccggcatcgagcat
ggtcttctgtacaatcaggaacagcgtctgtggtatatcgggccgatgttccgtcacgagcgtccgcagaaagggcgttatcgtcagttccatcagt
tgggctgcgaagttttcggtctgcaaggtccggatatcgacgctgaactgattatgctcactgcccgctggtggcgcgcgctgggtatttccgagca
cgtaactcttgagctgaactctatcggttcgctggaagcacgcgccaattaccgcgatgcgctggtggcattccttgagcagcataaagaaaagct
ggacgaagactgcaaacgccgcatgtacactaacccgctgcgcgtgctggattcaaaaaatccggaagtgcaggcgcttctcaacgacgctccgg
cattaggtgactatctggacgaggaatctcgtgagcattttgccggtctgtgcaaactgctggagagcgcggggatcgcttacaccgtaaaccagc
gtctggtgcgtggtctggattactacaaccgtaccgttttcgagtgggtgactaacagtctcggctcccagggcaccgtgtgtgcaggcggtcgttat
gacggtcttgtggaacaactgggcggtcgtgcaacaccggctgtcggttttgctatgggcctcgaacgtcttgtattgttagtacaggccgttaatcc
ggagtttaaagccgatcctgttgtcgatatatacctggtggcttcaggtgctgatacacaatctgcggctatggcattagctgagcgtctgcgtgatg
aattaccgggcgtgaaattgatgaccaaccacggcggcggcaactttaagaaacagtttgcccgtgctgataaatggggtgcccgcgttgctgtgg
tgctgggtgagtctgaagtggctaacggcacagcagtagtgaaggatttgcgctctggtgagcaaacggcagttgcgcaggatagcgtagccgcg
catttgcgcacgttactgggtcaccaccaccaccaccactaa  
Tyr-tRNA synthetase, abbreviation: TyrRS, DNA sequence: 
atggcaagcagtaacttgattaaacaactgcaagagcgggggctggtagcccaggtgacggacgaggaagcgttagcagagcgactggcgcaa
ggcccgatcgcgctctattgcggcttcgatcctaccgctgacagcttgcatttggggcatcttgttccattgttatgcctgaaacgcttccagcaggcg
ggccacaagccggttgcgctggtaggcggcgcgacgggtctgattggcgacccgagcttcaaagctgccgagcgtaagctgaacaccgaagaaa
ctgttcaggagtgggtggacaaaatccgtaagcaggttgccccgttcctcgatttcgactgtggagaaaactctgctatcgcggcgaacaactatg
actggttcggcaatatgaatgtgctgaccttcctgcgcgatattggcaaacacttctccgttaaccagatgatcaacaaagaagcggttaagcagc
gtctcaaccgtgaagatcaggggatttcgttcactgagttttcctacaacctgttgcagggttatgacttcgcctgtctgaacaaacagtacggtgtg
gtgctgcaaattggtggttctgaccagtggggtaacatcacttctggtatcgacctgacccgtcgtctgcatcagaatcaggtgtttggcctgaccgt
tccgctgatcactaaagcagatggcaccaagtttggtaaaactgaaggcggcgcagtctggttggatccgaagaaaaccagcccgtacaagttct
accagttctggatcaacactgcggatgccgacgtttaccgcttcctgaagttcttcacctttatgagcattgaagagatcaacgccctggaagaaga
agataaaaacagcggtaaagcaccgcgcgcccagtatgtactggcggagcaggtgactcgtctggttcacggtgaagaaggtttacaggcggca
aaacgtattaccgaatgcctgttcagcggttctttgagtgcgctgagtgaagcggacttcgaacagctggcgcaggacggcgtaccgatggttgag
atggaaaagggcgcagacctgatgcaggcactggtcgattctgaactgcaaccttcccgtggtcaggcacgtaaaactatcgcctccaatgccatc
accattaacggtgaaaaacagtccgatcctgaatacttctttaaagaagaagatcgtctgtttggtcgttttaccttactgcgtcgcggtaaaaaga
attactgtctgatttgctggaaacaccaccaccaccaccactaa  
Cys-tRNA synthetase, abbreviation: CysRS, DNA sequence: 
atgctaaaaatcttcaatactctgacacgccaaaaagaggagtttaagcctattcacgccggggaagtcggcatgtacgtgtgtggaatcaccgtt
tacgatctctgtcatatcggtcacgggcgtacctttgttgcttttgacgtggttgcgcgctatctgcgtttcctcggctataaactgaagtatgtgcgca
acattaccgatatcgacgacaaaatcatcaaacgcgccaatgaaaatggcgaaagctttgtggcgatggtggatcgcatgatcgccgaaatgcac
aaagattttgatgctttgaacattctgcgcccggatatggagccgcgcgcgacgcaccatatcgcagaaattattgaactcactgaacaactgatc
gccaaaggtcacgcttatgtggcggacaacggcgacgtgatgttcgacgtcccgaccgatccaacttatggcgtgctgtcgcgtcaggatctcgac
cagctgcacgcaggcgcgcgcgttgacgtggtcgacgacaaacgcaacccaatggacttcgttctgtggaagatgtcgaaagagggcgaaccga
gctggccgtctccgtggggcgcgggtcgtcctggctggcacattgaatgttcggcaatgaactgcaagcagctgggtaaccactttgatatccacg
gcggcggttcagacctgatgttcccgcaccacgaaaacgaaatcgcgcagtccacctgtgcccatgatggtcagtatgtgaactactggatgcact
cggggatggtgatggttgaccgcgagaagatgtccaaatcgctgggtaacttctttaccgtgcgcgatgtgctgaaatactacgacgcggaaaccg
tgcgttacttcctgatgtcgggccactatcgcagccagttgaactacagcgaagagaacctgaagcaggcgcgtgcggcgctggagcgtctctaca
ctgcgctgcgcggcacagataaaaccgttgcgcctgccggtggcgaagcgtttgaagcgcgctttattgaagcgatggacgacgatttcaacaccc
cggaagcctattccgtactgtttgatatggcgcgtgaagtaaaccgtctgaaagcagaagatatggcagcggcgaatgcaatggcatctcacctgc
gtaaactttccgctgtattgggcctgctggagcaagaaccggaagcgttcctgcaaagcggcgcgcaggcagacgacagcgaagtggctgagatt
gaagcgttaattcaacagcgtctggatgcccgtaaagcgaaagactgggcggcggcggatgcggcgcgtgatcgtcttaacgagatggggatcgt
gctggaagatggcccgcaagggaccacctggcgtcgtaagcaccaccaccaccaccactaa  
Trp-tRNA synthetase, abbreviation: TrpRS, DNA sequence: 
atgactaagcccatcgtttttagtggcgcacagccctcaggtgaattgaccattggtaactacatgggtgcgctgcgtcagtgggtaaacatgcagg
atgactaccattgcatttactgtatcgttgaccaacacgcgatcaccgtgcgccaggatgcacagaagctgcgtaaagcgacgctggatacgctgg
ccttgtatctggcttgtggtatcgatcctgagaaaagcaccatttttgttcagtcccacgtgccggaacatgcacagttaggctgggcactgaactgc
tatacctacttcggcgaactgagtcgcatgacgcagtttaaagataaatctgcgcgttatgccgagaacatcaacgctggtctgtttgactatccgg
tgctgatggcagcggacatcctgctgtatcaaactaatctggtaccggtgggtgaagaccagaaacagcacctcgaactgagccgcgatattgcc
cagcgtttcaacgcgctgtatggcgagatctttaaggtgccggagccgtttattccgaaatctggcgcgcgcgtaatgtcgctgctggagccgacca
agaagatgtccaagtctgacgataatcgcaataacgttatcggcctgctggaagatccgaaatcggtagtgaagaaaatcaaacgtgcggtcact
gactccgacgagccgccggtagttcgctacgatgtgcagaacaaagcgggcgtttccaacctgttggatatcctttcagcggtaacgggccagagc
atcccagaactggaaaaacagttcgaaggcaagatgtatggtcatctgaaaggtgaagtggctgatgccgtttccggtatgctgactgaattgcag
gaacgctatcaccgtttccgcaacgatgaagccttcctgcaacaggtgatgaaagatggcgcggaaaaagccagcgcgcacgcttcccgtacgct
aaaagcggtgtacgaagcgattggttttgtggcgaagccgcaccaccaccaccaccactaa  
Ser-tRNA synthetase, abbreviation: SerRS, DNA sequence: 
atgctcgatcccaatctgctgcgtaatgagccagacgcagtcgctgaaaaactggcacgccggggctttaagctggatgtagataagctgggcgct
cttgaagagcgtcgtaaagtattgcaggtcaaaacggaaaacctgcaagcggagcgtaactcccgatcgaaatccattggccaggcgaaagcgc
gcggggaagatatcgagcctttacgtctggaagtgaacaaactgggcgaagagctggatgcagcaaaagccgagctggatgctttacaggctga
aatccgcgatatcgcgctgaccatccctaacctgccggcagatgaagtgccggtaggtaaagacgaaaatgacaacgttgaagtcagccgctgg
ggtaccccgcgtgagtttgactttgaagttcgtgaccacgtgacgctgggtgaaatgcactctggcctcgactttgcagcggcagttaagctgactg
gttcccgctttgtggtaatgaaagggcagattgctcgcatgcaccgcgcactgtcgcagtttatgctggatctgcataccgaacagcatggctacag
tgagaactatgttccgtacctggttaaccaggacacgctgtacggtacgggtcaactgccgaagtttgctggcgatctgttccatactcgtccgctgg
aagaagaagcagacaccagtaactatgcgctgatcccaacggcagaagttccgctgactaacctggtgcgcggtgaaatcatcgatgaagatga
tctgccaattaagatgaccgcccacaccccatgcttccgttctgaagccggttcatacggtcgtgacacccgtggtctgatccgtatgcaccagttcg
acaaagttgaaatggtgcagatcgtgcgcccagaagactcaatggcggcgctggaagagatgactggtcatgcagaaaaagtcttgcagttgctg
ggcctgccgtaccgtaaaatcatcctttgcactggcgacatgggctttggcgcttgcaaaacttacgacctggaagtatggatcccggcacagaac
acctaccgtgagatctcttcctgctccaacgtttgggatttccaggcacgtcgtatgcaggcacgttgccgcagcaagtcggacaagaaaacccgtc
tggttcataccctgaacggttctggtctggctgttggtcgtacgctggttgcagtaatggaaaactatcagcaggctgatggtcgtattgaagtacca
gaagttctgcgtccgtatatgaacggactggaatatattggccaccaccaccaccaccactaa 
Val-tRNA synthetase, abbreviation: ValRS, DNA sequence: 
atggaaaagacatataacccacaagatatcgaacagccgctttacgagcactgggaaaagcagggctactttaagcctaatggcgatgaaagcc
aggaaagtttctgcatcatgatcccgccgccgaacgtcaccggcagtttgcacatgggtcacgccttccagcaaaccatcatggataccatgatcc
gctatcagcgcatgcagggcaaaaacaccctgtggcaggtcggtactgaccacgccgggatcgctacccagatggtcgttgagcgcaagattgcc
gcagaagaaggtaaaacccgtcacgactacggccgcgaagctttcatcgacaaaatctgggaatggaaagcggaatctggcggcaccattaccc
gtcagatgcgccgtctcggcaactccgtcgactgggagcgtgaacgcttcaccatggacgaaggcctgtccaatgcggtgaaagaagttttcgttc
gtctgtataaagaagacctgatttaccgtggcaaacgcctggtaaactgggatccgaaactgcgcaccgctatctctgacctggaagtcgaaaacc
gcgaatcgaaaggttcgatgtggcacatccgctatccgctggctgacggtgcgaaaaccgcagacggtaaagattatctggtggtcgcgactacc
cgtccagaaaccctgctgggcgatactggcgtagccgttaacccggaagatccgcgttacaaagatctgattggcaaatatgtcattctgccgctg
gttaaccgtcgtattccgatcgttggcgacgaacacgccgacatggaaaaaggcaccggctgcgtgaaaatcactccggcgcacgactttaacga
ctatgaagtgggtaaacgtcacgccctgccgatgatcaacatcctgacctttgacggcgatatccgtgaaagcgcccaggtgttcgataccaaagg
taacgaatctgacgtttattccagcgaaatccctgcggagttccagaaactggagcgttttgctgcacgtaaagcagtcgttgccgcagttgacgcg
cttggcctgctggaagaaattaaaccgcacgacctgaccgttccttacggcgaccgtggcggcgtagttatcgaaccaatgctgaccgaccagtgg
tacgtgcgtgccgatgtcctggcgaaaccggcggttgaagcggttgagaacggcgacattcagttcgtaccgaagcagtacgaaaacatgtactt
ctcctggatgcgcgatattcaggactggtgtatctctcgtcagttgtggtggggtcaccgtatcccggcatggtatgacgaagcgggtaacgtttatg
ttggccgcaacgaagacgaagtgcgtaaagaaaataacctcggtgctgatgttgtcctgcgtcaggacgaagacgttctcgatacctggttctcttc
tgcgctgtggaccttctctacccttggctggccggaaaataccgacgccctgcgtcagttccacccaaccagcgtgatggtatctggtttcgacatca
ttttcttctggattgcccgcatgatcatgatgaccatgcacttcatcaaagatgaaaatggcaaaccgcaggtgccgttccacaccgtttacatgacc
ggcctgattcgtgatgacgaaggccagaagatgtccaaatccaagggtaacgttatcgacccactggatatggttgacggtatttcgctgccagaa
ctgctggaaaaacgtaccggcaatatgatgcagccgcagctggcggacaaaatccgtaagcgcaccgagaagcagttcccgaacggtattgagc
cgcacggtactgacgcgctgcgcttcaccctggcggcgctggcgtctaccggtcgtgacatcaactgggatatgaagcgtctggaaggttaccgta
acttctgtaacaagctgtggaacgccagccgctttgtgctgatgaacacagaaggtcaggattgcggcttcaacggcggcgaaatgacgctgtcgc
tggcggaccgctggattctggcggagttcaaccagaccatcaaagcgtaccgcgaagcgctggacagcttccgcttcgatatcgccgcaggcattc
tgtatgagttcacctggaaccagttctgtgactggtatctcgagctgaccaagccggtaatgaacggtggcaccgaagcagaactgcgcggtactc
gccatacgctggtgactgtactggaaggtctgctgcgcctcgcgcatccgatcattccgttcatcaccgaaaccatctggcagcgtgtgaaagtact
ttgcggtatcactgccgacaccatcatgctgcaaccgttcccgcagtacgatgcgtctcaggttgatgaagccgcactggccgacaccgaatggct
gaaacaggcgatcgttgcggtacgtaacatccgtgcagaaatgaacatcgcgccgggcaaaccgctggagctgctgctgcgtggttgcagcgcgg
atgcagaacgtcgcgtaaatgaaaaccgtggcttcctgcaaaccctggcgcgtctggaaagtatcaccgtgctgcctgccgatgacaaaggtccg
gtttccgttacgaagatcatcgacggtgcagagctgctgatcccgatggctggcctcatcaacaaagaagatgagctggcgcgtctggcgaaaga
agtggcgaagattgaaggtgaaatcagccgtatcgagaacaaactggcgaacgaaggctttgtcgcccgcgcaccggaagcggtcatcgcgaaa
gagcgtgagaagctggaaggctatgcggaagcgaaagcgaaactgattgaacagcaggctgttatcgccgcgctgcaccaccaccaccaccact
aa 
Met-tRNA synthetase, abbreviation: MetRS, DNA sequence: 
atgactcaagtcgcgaagaaaatcctggtgacgtgcgcactgccgtacgctaacggctcaatccacctcggccacatgctggagcacatccaggc
tgatgtctgggtccgttaccagcgaatgcgcggccacgaggtcaacttcatctgcgccgacgatgcccacggtacaccgatcatgctgaaagctca
gcagcttggtatcaccccggagcagatgattggcgaaatgagtcaggagcatcagactgatttcgcaggctttaacatcagctatgacaactatca
ctcgacgcacagcgaagagaaccgccagttgtcagaacttatctactctcgcctgaaagaaaacggttttattaaaaaccgcaccatctctcagct
gtacgatccggaaaaaggcatgttcctgccggaccgttttgtgaaaggcacctgcccgaaatgtaaatccccggatcaatacggcgataactgcg
aagtctgcggcgcgacctacagcccgactgaactgatcgagccgaaatcggtggtttctggcgctacgccggtaatgcgtgattctgaacacttctt
ctttgatctgccctctttcagcgaaatgttgcaggcatggacccgcagcggtgcgttgcaggagcaggtggcaaataaaatgcaggagtggtttga
atctggcctgcaacagtgggatatctcccgcgacgccccttacttcggttttgaaatcccgaacgcgccgggcaaatatttctacgtctggctggac
gcaccgattggctacatgggttctttcaagaatctgtgcgacaagcgcggcgacagcgtaagcttcgatgaatactggaagaaagactccaccgc
cgagctgtaccacttcatcggtaaagatattgtttacttccacagcctgttctggcctgccatgctggaaggcagcaacttccgcaagccgtccaac
ctgtttgttcatggctatgtgacggtgaacggcgcaaagatgtccaagtctcgcggcacctttattaaagccagcacctggctgaatcattttgacgc
agacagcctgcgttactactacactgcgaaactctcttcgcgcattgatgatatcgatctcaacctggaagatttcgttcagcgtgtgaatgccgata
tcgttaacaaagtggttaacctggcctcccgtaatgcgggctttatcaacaagcgttttgacggcgtgctggcaagcgaactggctgacccgcagtt
gtacaaaaccttcactgatgccgctgaagtgattggtgaagcgtgggaaagccgtgagtttggtaaagccgtgcgcgaaatcatggcgctggctg
atctggctaaccgctatgtcgatgaacaggctccgtgggtggtggcgaaacaggaaggccgcgatgccgacctgcaagcaatttgctcaatgggc
atcaacctgttccgcgtgctgatgacttacctgaagccggtactgccgaaactgaccgagcgtgcagaagcattcctcaatacggaactgacctgg
gatggtatccagcaaccgctgctgggccacaaagtgaatccgttcaaggcgctgtataaccgcatcgatatgaggcaggttgaagcactggtgga
agcctctaaagaagaagtaaaagccgctgccgcgccggtaactggcccgctggcagatgatccgattcaggaaaccatcacctttgacgacttcg
ctaaagttgacctgcgcgtggcgctgattgaaaacgcagagtttgttgaaggttctgacaaactgctgcgcctgacgctggatctcggcggtgaaa
aacgcaatgtcttctccggtattcgttctgcttacccggatccgcaggcactgattggtcgtcacaccattatggtggctaacctggcaccacgtaaa
atgcgcttcggtatctctgaaggcatggtgatggctgccggtcctggcgggaaagatattttcctgctaagcccggatgccggtgctaaaccgggtc
atcaggtgaaacaccaccaccaccaccactaa 
Arg-tRNA synthetase, abbreviation: ArgRS, DNA sequence: 
atgcaccaccaccaccaccacaatattcaggctcttctctcagaaaaagtccgtcaggccatgattgcggcaggcgcgcctgcggattgcgaaccg
caggttcgtcagtcagcaaaagttcagttcggcgactatcaggctaacggcatgatggcagttgctaaaaaactgggtatggcaccgcgacaatt
agcagagcaggtgctgactcatctggatcttaacggtatcgccagcaaagttgagatcgccggtccaggctttatcaacattttccttgatccggca
ttcctggctgaacatgttcagcaggcgctggcgtccgatcgtctcggtgttgctacgccagaaaaacagaccattgtggttgactactctgcgccaa
acgtggcgaaagagatgcacgtcggtcacctgcgctctaccattattggtgacgcagcagtgcgtactctggagttcctcggtcacaaagtgattcg
cgcaaaccacgtcggcgactggggcactcagttcggtatgctgattgcatggctggaaaagcagcagcaggaaaacgccggtgaaatggagctg
gctgaccttgaaggtttctaccgcgatgcgaaaaagcattacgatgaagatgaagagttcgccgagcgcgcacgtaactacgtggtaaaactgca
aagcggtgacgaatatttccgcgagatgtggcgcaaactggtcgacatcaccatgacgcagaaccagatcacctacgatcgtctcaacgtgacgc
tgacccgtgatgacgtgatgggcgaaagcctctacaacccgatgctgccaggaattgtggcggatctcaaagccaaaggtctggcagtagaaagc
gaaggggcgaccgtcgtattccttgatgagtttaaaaacaaggaaggcgaaccgatgggcgtgatcattcagaagaaagatggcggctatctcta
caccaccactgatatcgcctgtgcgaaatatcgttatgaaacactgcatgccgatcgcgtgctgtattacatcgactcccgtcagcatcaacacctg
atgcaggcatgggcgatcgtccgtaaagcaggctatgtaccggaatccgtaccgctggaacaccacatgttcggcatgatgctgggtaaagacgg
caaaccgttcaaaacccgcgcgggtggtacagtgaaactggccgatctgctggatgaagccctggaacgtgcacgccgtctggtggcagaaaag
aacccggatatgccagccgacgagctggaaaaactggctaacgcggttggtattggtgcggtgaaatatgcggatctctccaaaaaccgcaccac
ggactacatcttcgactgggacaacatgctggcgtttgagggtaataccgcgccatacatgcagtacgcatacacgcgtgtattgtccgtgttccgt
aaagcagaaattgacgaagagcaactggctgcggctccggttatcatccgtgaagatcgtgaagcgcaactggcagctcgcctgctgcaatttga
agaaaccctcaccgtggttgcccgtgaaggcacgccgcatgtaatgtgtgcttacctgtacgatctggccggtctgttctctggcttctacgagcact
gcccgatcctcagcgcagaaaacgaagaagtgcgtaacagccgtctaaaactggcacaactgacggcgaagacgctgaagctgggtctggatac
gctgggtattgagactgtagagcgtatgtaa 
Gln-tRNA synthetase, abbreviation: GlnRS, DNA sequence: 
atgagtgaggcagaagcccgcccgactaactttatccgtcagatcatcgatgaagatctggccagtggtaagcacaccacagtacacacccgtttc
ccgccggagccgaatggctatctgcatattggccatgcgaaatctatctgcctgaacttcgggatcgcccaggactataaaggccagtgcaacctg
cgtttcgacgacactaacccggtaaaagaagatatcgagtatgttgagtcgatcaaaaacgacgtagagtggttaggttttcactggtctggtaac
gtccgttactcctccgattattttgatcagctccacgcctatgcgatcgaactgatcaataaaggcctggcgtacgttgatgaactgacgccggaac
agatccgcgaataccgcggcaccctgacgcaaccgggtaaaaacagcccgtaccgcgaccgcagcgttgaagagaacctggcgctgttcgaaaa
aatgcgtgccggtggttttgaagaaggtaaagcctgcctgcgtgcgaaaatcgacatggcttcaccgtttatcgtgatgcgcgatccggtgctgtac
cgtattaagtttgctgaacaccaccagactggcaacaagtggtgcatctacccgatgtacgacttcacccactgcatcagcgatgccctggaaggt
attacgcactctctgtgtacgcttgagttccaggacaaccgtcgtctgtacgactgggtactggacaacatcacgattcctgttcacccgcgccagta
tgagttctcgcgcctgaatctggaatacaccgtgatgtccaagcgtaagttgaacctgctggtgaccgacaagcacgttgaaggctgggatgaccc
gcgtatgccgaccatttccggtctgcgtcgtcgtggttacactgcggcttctattcgtgagttctgcaaacgcatcggcgtgaccaagcaggacaac
accattgagatggcgtcgctggaatcctgcatccgtgaagatctcaacgaaaatgcgccgcgcgcaatggcggttatcgatccggtgaaactggtt
atcgaaaactatcagggcgaaggcgaaatggttaccatgccgaaccatccgaacaaaccggaaatgggcagccgtcaggtgccgtttagcggtg
agatttggattgatcgcgccgatttccgcgaagaagctaacaagcagtacaaacgtctggtgctgggtaaagaagtgcgtctgcgtaatgcttatg
tgattaaggcagaacgcgtcgagaaagatgccgaaggtaatatcaccaccatcttctgtacttatgacgccgataccttaagcaaagatccggca
gatggtcgtaaagtcaaaggtgttattcactgggtgagcgcggcacatgcgctgccggttgaaatccgtttgtatgaccgtctgttcagcgtgccta
acccaggtgctgcggatgatttcctgtcggtgattaacccggaatcgctggtgatcaaacagggctttgctgaaccgtcgctgaaagatgcggttgc
gggtaaagcattccagtttgagcgtgaaggttacttctgcctcgatagccgccattctacggcggaaaaaccggtatttaaccgcaccgttgggctg
cgtgatacctgggcgaaagtaggcgagcaccaccaccaccaccactaa 
Leu-tRNA synthetase, abbreviation: LeuRS, DNA sequence: 
atgcaagagcaataccgcccggaagagatagaatccaaagtacagcttcattgggatgagaagcgcacatttgaagtaaccgaagacgagagc
aaagagaagtattactgcctgtctatgcttccctatccttctggtcgactacacatgggccacgtacgtaactacaccatcggtgacgtgatcgcccg
ctaccagcgtatgctgggcaaaaacgtcctgcaaccgatcggctgggacgcgtttggtctgcctgcggaaggcgcggcggtgaaaaacaacacc
gctccggcaccgtggacgtacgacaacatcgcgtatatgaaaaaccagctcaaaatgctgggctttggttatgactggagccgcgagctggcaac
ctgtacgccggaatactaccgttgggaacagaagttcttcaccgagctgtataaaaaaggcctggtatataagaagacttctgcggtcaactggtg
cccgaacgaccagaccgtactggcgaacgaacaagttatcgacggctgctgctggcgctgcgataccaaagttgaacgtaaagagatcccgcag
tggtttatcaaaatcactgcttacgctgacgagctgctcaacgatctggataaactggatcactggccagacaccgttaaaaccatgcagcgtaac
tggatcggtcgttccgaaggcgtggagatcaccttcaacgttaacgactatgacaacacgctgaccgtttacactacccgcccggacacctttatgg
gttgtacctacctggcggtagctgcgggtcatccgctggcgcagaaagcggcggaaaataatcctgaactggcggcctttattgacgaatgccgta
acaccaaagttgccgaagctgaaatggcgacgatggagaaaaaaggcgtcgatactggctttaaagcggttcacccattaacgggcgaagaaat
ccccgtttgggcagcaaacttcgtattgatggagtacggcacgggcgcagttatggcggtaccggggcacgaccagcgcgactacgagtttgcctc
taaatacggcctgaacatcaaaccggttatcctggcagctgacggctctgagccagatctttctcagcaagccctgactgaaaaaggcgtgctgtt
caactctggcgagttcaacggtcttgaccatgaagcggccttcaacgccatcgccgataaactgactgcgatgggcgttggcgagcgtaaagtga
actaccgcctgcgcgactggggtgtttcccgtcagcgttactggggcgcgccgattccgatggtgacgctggaagacggtaccgtaatgccgaccc
cggacgaccagctgccggtgatcctgccggaagatgtggtaatggacggcattaccagcccgattaaagcagatccggagtgggcgaaaactac
cgttaacggtatgccagcactgcgtgaaaccgacactttcgacacctttatggagtcctcctggtactatgcgcgctacacttgcccgcagtacaaa
gaaggtatgctggattccgaagcggctaactactggctgccggtggatatctacattggtggtattgaacacgccattatgcacctgctctacttccg
cttcttccacaaactgatgcgtgatgcaggcatggtgaactctgacgaaccagcgaaacagttgctgtgtcagggtatggtgctggcagatgccttc
tactatgttggcgaaaacggcgaacgtaactgggtttccccggttgatgctatcgttgaacgtgacgagaaaggccgtatcgtgaaagcgaaaga
tgcggcaggccatgaactggtttataccggcatgagcaaaatgtccaagtcgaagaacaacggtatcgacccgcaggtgatggttgaacgttacg
gcgcggacaccgttcgtctgtttatgatgtttgcttctccggctgatatgactctcgaatggcaggaatccggtgtggaaggggctaaccgcttcctg
aaacgtgtctggaaactggtttacgagcacacagcaaaaggtgatgttgcggcactgaacgttgatgcgctgactgaaaatcagaaagcgctgcg
tcgcgatgtgcataaaacgatcgctaaagtgaccgatgatatcggccgtcgtcagaccttcaacaccgcgattgcggcgattatggagctgatgaa
caaactggcgaaagcaccaaccgatggcgagcaggatcgcgctctgatgcaggaagcactgctggccgttgtccgtatgcttaacccgttcaccc
cgcacatctgcttcacgctgtggcaggaactgaaaggcgaaggcgatatcgacaacgcgccgtggccggttgctgacgaaaaagcgatggtgga
agactccacgctggtcgtggtgcaggttaacggtaaagtccgtgccaaaatcaccgttccggtggacgcaacggaagaacaggttcgcgaacgtg
ctggccaggaacatctggtagcaaaatatcttgatggcgttactgtacgtaaagtgatttacgtaccaggtaaactcctcaatctggtcgttggcca
ccaccaccaccaccactaa 
Thr-tRNA synthetase, abbreviation: ThrRS, DNA sequence: 
atgcaccaccaccaccaccaccctgttataactcttcctgatggcagccaacgccattacgatcacgctgtaagccccatggatgttgcgctggaca
ttggtccaggtctggcgaaagcctgtatcgcagggcgcgttaatggcgaactggttgatgcttgcgatctgattgaaaacgacgcacaactgtcga
tcattaccgccaaagacgaagaaggtctggagatcattcgtcactcctgtgcgcacctgttagggcacgcgattaaacaactttggccgcatacca
aaatggcaatcggcccggttattgacaacggtttttattacgacgttgatcttgaccgcacgttaacccaggaagatgtcgaagcactcgagaagc
ggatgcacgagcttgctgagaaaaactacgacgtcattaagaagaaagtcagctggcacgaagcgcgtgaaactttcgccaaccgtggggagag
ctacaaagtctccattcttgacgaaaacatcgcccatgatgacaagccaggtctgtacttccatgaagaatatgtcgatatgtgccgcggtccgcac
gtaccgaacatgcgtttctgccatcatttcaaactaatgaaaacggcaggggcttactggcgtggcgacagcaacaacaaaatgttgcaacgtatt
tacggtacggcgtgggcagacaaaaaagcacttaacgcttacctgcaacgcctggaagaagccgcgaaacgcgaccaccgtaaaatcggtaaa
cagctcgacctgtaccacatgcaggaagaagcgccgggtatggtattctggcacaacgacggctggaccatcttccgtgaactggaagtgtttgtt
cgttctaaactgaaagagtaccagtatcaggaagttaaaggtccgttcatgatggaccgtgtcctgtgggaaaaaaccggtcactgggacaacta
caaagatgcaatgttcaccacatcttctgagaaccgtgaatactgcattaagccgatgaactgcccgggtcacgtacaaatcttcaaccaggggct
gaagtcttatcgcgatctgccgctgcgtatggccgagtttggtagctgccaccgtaacgagccgtcaggttcgctgcatggcctgatgcgcgtgcgt
ggatttacccaggatgacgcgcatatcttctgtactgaagaacaaatccgcgatgaagtGaaTggatgtatccgtttagtGtaCgaCatgtacag
cacttttggcttcgagaagatcgtcgtcaaactctccactcgtcctgaaaaacgtattggcagcgacgaaatgtgggatcgtgctgaggcggacct
ggcggttgcgctggaagaaaacaacatcccgtttgaatatcaactgggtgaaggcgctttctacggtccgaaaattgagtttaccctgtatgactgc
ctcgatcgtgcatggcagtgcggtacagtacagctggacttctctttgccgtctcgtctgagcgcttcttatgtaggcgaagacaatgaacgtaaagt
accggtaatgattcaccgcgcaattctggggtcgatggaacgtttcatcggtatcctgaccgaagagttcgctggtttcttcccgacctggcttgcgc
cggttcaggttgttatcatgaatattaccgattcacagtctgaatacgttaacgaattgacgcaaaaactatcaaatgcgggcattcgtgttaaagc
agacCtCCgCaatgagaagattggcttCaaGatccgcgagcacactttgcgtcgcgtcccatatatgctggtctgtggtgataaagaggtggaat
caggcaaagttgccgttcgcacccgccgtggtaaagacctgggaagcatggacgtaaatgaagtgatcgagaagctgcaacaagagattcgcag
ccgcagtcttaaacaactggaggaataa 
Lys-tRNA synthetase, abbreviation: LysRS, DNA sequence: 
atgtctgaacaacacgcacagggcgctgacgcggtagtcgatcttaacaatgaactgaaaacgcgtcgtgagaagctggcgaacctgcgcgagc
aggggattgccttcccgaacgatttccgtcgcgatcatacctctgaccagttgcacgcagagttcgacggcaaagagaacgaagaactggaagcg
ctgaacatcgaagtcgccgttgctggccgcatgatgacccgtcgtattatgggtaaagcgtctttcgttaccctgcaagacgttggcggtcgcattca
gctgtacgttgcccgtgacgatctcccggaaggcgtttataacgagcagttcaaaaaatgggacctcggcgacatcctcggcgcgaaaggtaagc
tgttcaaaaccaaaaccggcgaactgtctatccactgcaccgagttgcgtctgctgaccaaagcactgcgtccgctgccggataagttccacggctt
gcaggatcaggaagcgcgctatcgtcagcgttatctcgatctcatctccaacgatgaatcccgcaacacctttaaagtgcgctcgcagatcctctct
ggtattcgccagttcatggtgaaccgcggctttatggaagttgaaacgccgatgatgcaggtgatccctggcggtgccgctgcgcgtccgtttatca
cccaccataacgcgctggatctcgacatgtacctgcgtatcgcgccggaactgtacctcaagcgtctggtggttggtggcttcgagcgtgtattcga
aatcaaccgtaacttccgtaacgaaggtatttccgtacgtcataacccagagttcaccatgatggaactctacatggcttacgcagattacaaagat
ctgatcgagctgaccgaatcgctgttccgtactctggcacaggatattctcggtaagacggaagtgacctacggcgacgtgacgctggacttcggt
aaaccgttcgaaaaactgaccatgcgtgaagcgatcaagaaatatcgcccggaaaccgacatggcggatctggacaacttcgactctgcgaaag
cgattgctgaatctatcggcatccacgttgagaagagctggggtctgggccgtatcgttaccgagatcttcgaagaagtggcagaagcacatctga
ttcagccgaccttcattactgaatatccggcagaagtttctccgctggcgcgtcgtaacgacgttaacccggaaatcacagaccgctttgagttcttc
attggtggtcgtgaaatcggtaacggctttagcgagctgaatgacgcggaagatcaggcgcaacgcttcctggatcaggttgccgcgaaagacgc
aggtgacgacgaagcgatgttctacgatgaagattacgtcaccgcactggaacatggcttaccgccgacagcaggtctgggaattggtatcgacc
gtatggtaatgctgttcaccaacagccataccatccgcgacgttattctgttcccggcgatgcgtccggtaaaacaccaccaccaccaccactaa 
Asn-tRNA synthetase, abbreviation: AsnRS, DNA sequence: 
atgcaccaccaccaccaccacagcgttgtgcctgtagccgacgtactccagggccgtgtagccgttgacagcgaagtcaccgtgcgcggatgggt
acgtacccgccgagattcaaaagctggcatctccttcctcgccgtttatgacggttcctgctttgatcctgtacaggctgtcatcaataattctctgcc
caattacaatgaagacgtcctgcgtctgaccaccggctgctcggtcattgtgacgggtaaagtcgtggcgtcgccgggccaggggcaacaatttga
aatccaggccagcaaggttgaagttgctggttgggttgaagatccagacacttacccgatggcggcaaaacgccacagcattgagtatctgcgtg
aagtcgctcacctgcgtccgcgcacaaacctgattggtgccgtcgcgcgcgttcgccatacgctggcgcaggcgctgcatcgcttctttaacgagca
gggattcttctgggtttcaacgccactgattaccgcatctgataccgaaggtgcaggcgaaatgttccgcgtttctacgctggatctggaaaacctg
ccgcgtaacgatcagggcaaagtggatttcgacaaagacttctttggtaaagagtctttcctgaccgtatctggccagttgaacggcgaaacctac
gcttgcgcattgtccaaaatctataccttcggcccgactttccgtgctgaaaactccaacaccagccgtcacctggcggagttctggatgctggagc
cggaagtggcgtttgctaacctgaacgatattgcgggtctggctgaagccatgctgaaatatgtcttcaaagcggttctcgaagaacgcgctgacg
acatgaagttcttcgctgaacgcgtagataaagatgccgtttcacgtctggaacgcttcattgaagccgattttgcgcaggtggattataccgacgc
agtgaccattctcgaaaactgcggcaggaagtttgaaaacccggtttactggggagtcgatctctcttctgagcatgagcgttatctggcggaaga
acactttaaagcaccggtagtggttaaaaactatccgaaagatattaaagcgttctatatgcgccttaacgaagacggtaaaaccgttgcggctat
ggacgttctggctccgggcatcggtgagatcattggtggctcccagcgtgaagaacgtctggacgtgctggacgagcgtatgctggaaatgggcct
gaataaagaagattactggtggtatcgcgatctgcgtcgctacggtactgttccgcattcaggtttcggtcttggttttgaacgtctgattgcttacgt
aactggcgtgcaaaacgtacgtgatgtgattccgttcccacgtactccgcgtaacgccagcttctaa 
Ile-tRNA synthetase, abbreviation: IleRS, DNA sequence: 
atgagtgactataaatcaaccctgaatctgccggaaacagggttcccgatgcgtggcgatctcgccaagcgcgaacccggaatgctggcgcgttg
gactgatgatgatctgtacggcatcatccgtgcggctaaaaaaggcaaaaaaaccttcattctgcatgatggccctccttatgcgaatggcagcatt
catattggtcactcggttaacaagattctgaaagacattatcgtgaagtccaaagggctttccggttatgactcgccgtatgtgcctggctgggactg
ccacggtctgccgatcgagctgaaagtcgagcaagaatacggtaagccgggtgagaagttcaccgccgccgagttccgcgccaagtgccgcgaa
tacgcggcgacccaggttgacggtcaacgcaaagactttatccgtctgggcgtgctgggcgactggtcgcacccgtacctgaccatggacttcaaa
actgaagccaacatcatccgcgcgctgggcaaaatcatcggcaacggtcacctgcacaaaggcgcgaagccagttcactggtgcgttgactgccg
ttctgcgctggcggaagcggaagttgagtattacgacaaaacttctccgtccatcgacgttgctttccaggcagtcgatcaggatgcactgaaagc
aaagtttgccgtaagcaacgttaacggcccaatctcgctggtaatctggaccaccacgccgtggactctgcctgccaaccgcgcaatctctattgca
ccagatttcgactatgcgctggtgcagatcgacggtcaggccgtgattctggcgaaagatctggttgaaagcgtaatgcagcgtatcggcgtgacc
gattacaccattctcggcacggtaaaaggtgcggagcttgagctgctgcgctttacccatccgtttatgggcttcgacgttccggcaatcctcggcga
tcacgttaccctggatgccggtaccggtgccgttcacaccgcgcctggccacggcccggacgactatgtgatcggtcagaaatacggcctggaaac
cgctaacccggttggcccggacggcacttatctgccgggcacttatccgacgctggatggcgtgaacgtcttcaaagcgaacgacatcgtcgttgc
gctgctgcaagaaaaaggcgcgctgctgcacgttgagaaaatgcagcacagctatccgtgctgctggcgtcacaaaacgccgatcatcttccgcg
cgacgccgcagtggttcgtcagcatggatcagaaaggtctgcgtgcgcagtcactgaaagagatcaaaggcgtgcagtggatcccggactgggg
ccaggcgcgtatcgagtcgatggttgctaaccgtcctgactggtgtatctcccgtcagcgcacctggggtgtaccgatgtcactgttcgtgcacaaa
gacacggaagagctgcatccgcgtacccttgaactgatggaagaagtggcaaaacgcgttgaagtcgatggcatccaggcgtggtgggatctcg
atgcgaaagagatcctcggcgacgaagctgatcagtacgtgaaagtgccggacacattggatgtatggtttgactccggatctacccactcttctgt
tgttgacgtgcgtccggagtttgccggtcacgcagcggacatgtatctggaaggttctgaccaacaccgcggctggttcatgtcttccctaatgatct
ccaccgcgatgaagggtaaagcgccgtatcgtcaggtactgacccacggctttaccgtggatggtcagggccgcaagatgtctaaatccatcggc
aataccgtttcgccgcaggatgtgatgaacaaactgggcgcggatattctgcgtctgtgggtggcatcaaccgactacaccggtgaaatggccgtt
tctgacgagatcctgaaacgtgctgccgatagctatcgtcgtatccgtaacaccgcgcgcttcctgctggcaaacctgaacggttttgatccagcaa
aagatatggtgaaaccggaagagatggtggtactggatcgctgggccgtaggttgtgcgaaagcggcacaggaagacatcctcaaggcgtacga
agcatacgatttccacgaagtggtacagcgtctgatgcgcttctgctccgttgagatgggttccttctacctcgacatcatcaaagaccgtcagtaca
ccgccaaagcggacagtgtggcgcgtcgtagctgccagactgcgctatatcacatcgcagaagcgctggtgcgctggatggcaccaatcctctcct
tcaccgctgatgaagtgtggggctacctgccgggcgaacgtgaaaaatacgtcttcaccggtgagtggtacgaaggcctgtttggcctggcagaca
gtgaagcgatgaacgatgcgttctgggacgagctgttgaaagtgcgtggcgaagtgaacaaagtcattgagcaagcgcgtgccgacaagaaagt
gggtggctcgctggaagcggcagtaaccttgtatgcagaaccggaactgtcggcgaaactgaccgcgctgggcgatgaattacgatttgtcctgtt
gacctccggcgctaccgttgcagactataacgacgcacctgctgatgctcagcagagcgaagtactcaaagggctgaaagtcgcgttgagtaaag
ccgaaggtgagaagtgcccacgctgctggcactacacccaggatgtcggcaaggtggcggaacacgcagaaatctgtggccgctgtgtcagcaa
cgtcgccggtgacggtgaaaaacgtaagtttgcccaccaccaccaccaccactaa 
Ala-tRNA synthetase, abbreviation: AlaRS, DNA sequence: 
atgcaccaccaccaccaccacagcaagagcaccgctgagatccgtcaggcgtttctcgactttttccatagtaagggacatcaggtagttgccagc
agctccctggtaccccataacgacccaactttgttgtttaccaacgccgggatgaaccagttcaaggatgtgttccttgggctcgacaagcgtaatt
attcccgcgctaccacttcccaacgctgcgtgcgtgcgggtggtaaacacaacgacctggaaaacgtcggttacaccgcgcgtcaccataccttctt
cgaaatgctgggcaacttcagcttcggcgactatttcaaacacgatgccattcagtttgcatgggaactgctgaccagcgaaaaatggtttgccctg
ccgaaagagcgtctgtgggttaccgtctatgaaagcgacgacgaagcctacgaaatctgggaaaaagaagtagggatcccgcgcgaacgtatta
ttcgcatcggcgataacaaaggtgcgccatacgcatctgacaacttctggcagatgggtgacactggtccgtgcggcccgtgcaccgaaatcttct
acgatcacggcgaccacatttgggggggccctccgggaagcccggaagaagacggcgaccgctacattgagatctggaacatcgtcttcatgca
gttcaaccgccaggccgatggcacgatggaaccgctgccgaagccgtctgtagataccggtatgggtctggagcgtattgctgcggtgctgcaaca
cgttaactctaactatgacatcgacctgttccgcacgctgatccaggcggtagcgaaagtcactggcgcaaccgatctgagcaataaatcgctgcg
cgtaatcgctgaccacattcgttcttgtgcgttcctgatcgcggatggcgtaatgccgtccaatgaaaaccgtggttatgtactgcgtcgtatcattcg
tcgcgcagtgcgtcacggtaatatgctcggcgcgaaagaaaccttcttctacaaactggttggtccgctgatcgacgttatgggctctgcgggtgaa
gacctgaaacgccagcaggcgcaggttgagcaggtgctgaagactgaagaagagcagtttgctcgtactctggagcgcggtctggcgttgctgga
tgaagagctggcaaaactttctggtgatacgctggatggtgaaactgctttccgtctgtacgacacctatggcttcccggttgacctgacggctgatg
tttgtcgtgagcgcaacatcaaagttgacgaagctggttttgaagctgcaatggaagagcagcgtcgtcgcgcgcgcgaagccagcggctttggtg
ccgattacaacgcaatgatccgtgttgacagtgcatctgagtttaaaggctatgaccatctggaactgaacggcaaagtgactgcgctgtttgttga
tggtaaagcggttgatgccatcaatgcaggccaggaagctgtggtcgtgctggatcaaacgccattctatgcggaatccggcggtcaggttggcga
taaaggcgaactgaaaggcgctaacttctcctttgcggtggaagatacgcagaaatacggccaggcgattggtcacatcggtaaacttgctgcgg
gttctctgaaagtgggcgacgcggtgcaggctgatgttgatgaggctcgtcgcgcccgtattcgtctgaatcactccgcaacgcacctgatgcacgc
tgcgctgcgccaggttctgggtactcatgtatcgcagaaaggttcactggttaacgacaaggtgctgcgcttcgacttctcacacaacgaagcgatg
aaaccagaagagattcgtgcggtcgaagacctggtgaacacacagattcgtcgcaatttgccgatcgaaaccaacatcatggatctcgaagcggc
gaaagcgaaaggtgcgatggcgctgttcggcgagaagtatgatgagcgcgtacgcgtgctgagcatgggcgatttctctaccgagttgtgtggcg
gtactcacgccagccgcactggtgatattggtctgttccgcatcatctctgaatcgggtactgctgccggcgttcgtcgtatcgaagcggtaaccgga
gaaggtgctatcgccaccgttcatgcagacagcgatcgcttaagcgaagtcgcgcatctgctgaaaggcgatagcaataatctggctgataaagt
gcgctcagtactggaacgtacgcgtcagctggaaaaagagttacaacagcttaaagaacaagctgccgcacaggagagcgcaaatctttccagt
aaggcaatcgatgttaatggtgttaagctgttggttagcgagcttagcggtgttgagccgaaaatgttgcgtaccatggttgacgatttaaaaaatc
agctggggtcgacaattatcgtgctggcaacggtagtcgaaggtaaggtttctctgattgcaggcgtatctaaggacgtcacagatcgtgtgaaag
caggggaactgattggtatggtcgctcagcaggtgggcggcaagggtggtggacgtcctgacatggcgcaagccggtggtacggatgctgcggcc
ttaccggcagcgttagccagtgtgaaaggctgggtcagcgcgaaattgcaataa 
Phe-tRNA synthetase α, abbreviation: PheRS α, DNA sequence: 
atgatgcaccaccaccaccaccactcacatctcgcagaactggttgccagtgcgaaggcggccattagccaggcgtcagatgttgccgcgttagat
aatgtgcgcgtcgaatatttgggtaaaaaagggcacttaacccttcagatgacgaccctgcgtgagctgccgccagaagagcgtccggcagctgg
tgcggttatcaacgaagcgaaagagcaggttcagcaggcgctgaatgcgcgtaaagcggaactggaaagcgctgcactgaatgcgcgtctggcg
gcggaaacgattgatgtctctctgccaggtcgtcgcattgaaaacggcggtctgcatccggttacccgtaccatcgaccgtatcgaaagtttcttcg
gtgagcttggctttaccgtggcaaccgggccggaaatcgaagacgattatcataacttcgatgctctgaacattcctggtcaccacccggcgcgcg
ctgaccacgacactttctggtttgacactacccgcctgctgcgtacccagacctctggcgtacagatccgcaccatgaaagcccagcagccaccga
ttcgtatcatcgcgcctggccgtgtttatcgtaacgactacgaccagactcacacgccgatgttccatcagatggaaggtctgattgttgataccaac
atcagctttaccaacctgaaaggcacgctgcacgacttcctgcgtaacttctttgaggaagatttgcagattcgcttccgtccttcctacttcccgttt
accgaaccttctgcggaagtggacgtcatgggtaaaaacggtaaatggctggaagtgctgggctgcgggatggtgcatccgaacgtgttgcgtaa
cgttggcatcgacccggaagtttactctggtttcgccttcgggatggggatggagcgtctgactatgttgcgttacggcgtcaccgacctgcgttcat
tcttcgaaaacgatctgcgtttcctcaaacagtttaaataa 
Phe-tRNA synthetase β, abbreviation: PheRS β, DNA sequence: 
atgaagttcagtgaactgtggttacgcgaatgggtgaacccggcgattgatagcgatgcgctggcaaatcaaatcactatggcgggcctggaagtt
gacggtgtagaaccggttgccggcagcttccacggcgtggtcgttggtgaagtggttgagtgtgcgcagcatccgaacgctgacaaactgcgtgtg
acaaaagtgaatgtcggcggcgatcgcctgctggacatcgtctgcggtgcgccaaactgccgtcagggcctgcgtgtagcggtagcgaccattggt
gctgttctgccgggtgatttcaaaattaaagcggcgaaactgcgtggcgaaccgtctgaagggatgctgtgctccttctctgaactgggcatttctg
acgatcacagcggcattatcgaactgcctgcggatgcgccgattggcaccgatatccgtgaatacctgaaacttgatgacaacaccatcgaaatca
gcgtgacgccaaaccgtgccgactgcttaggcatcattggtgttgcgcgtgacgttgccgtgctgaaccagctgccgctggttcaaccggaaatcgt
tccggttggtgcgaccatcgacgacacgctgccgattacagtcgaagcgccggaagcctgcccgcgttatcttggccgtgtggtaaaaggcattaa
cgttaaagcgccaactccgctgtggatgaaagaaaaactgcgtcgttgcgggatccgttctatcgatgcagttgttgacgtcaccaactatgtgctg
ctcgaactgggccagccgatgcacgctttcgataaagatcgcattgaaggcggcattgtggtgcggatggcgaaagagggcgaaacgctggtgct
gctcgacggtactgaagcgaagctgaatgctgacactctggtcatcgccgaccacaacaaggcgctggcgatgggcggcatcttcggtggcgaac
actctggcgtgaatgacgaaacacaaaacgtgctgctggaatgcgcgttctttagcccgctgtctatcaccggtcgtgctcgtcgtcatggcctgcat
accgatgcgtctcaccgttatgagcgtggcgttgatccggcactgcaacacaaagcgatggaacgtgcgacccgtctgctgatcgacatctgcggt
ggtgaggctggcccggtaattgatatcaccaacgaagcaacgctgccgaagcgtgcaaccatcactctacgtcgtagcaaactggatcgcctgat
cggccatcatattgcggatgagcaggtaactgacattctgcgtcgtctcggctgcgaagtgaccgaaggcaaagacgaatggcaggcagttgcgc
cgagctggcgtttcgatatggagattgaagaagatctggttgaagaagtcgcgcgtgtttacggctacaacaacatcccggatgagccggtacag
gcaagcctgattatgggtactcaccgtgaagctgacctgtcgctcaagcgcgtgaaaacgctgctcaacgacaaaggctatcaggaagtgatcac
ctacagcttcgttgatccgaaagtgcagcagatgatccatccaggcgttgaagccttactgctgccaagcccgatctctgttgaaatgtcagcaatg
cgtctttctctgtggactggcctgctggcaaccgtggtgtacaaccagaaccgtcagcagaaccgtgtgcgcattttcgaaagcggtctgcgtttcgt
accagatactcaggcaccgttgggcattcgtcaggatctgatgttagccggtgtgatttgcggtaaccgttacgaagagcactggaacctggcaaa
agagaccgttgatttctatgatttgaaaggcgatcttgaatccgttctcgacctgaccggtaaactgaatgaggttgagttccgtgcagaagcgaat
ccggcactgcatccggggcaatccgcagcgatttatctgaaaggtgaacgtattggttttgttggggttgttcatcctgaactggaacgtaaactgg
atcttaacggtcgcactctggtgttcgaactggagtggaacaagctcgcagaccgcgtggtgcctcaggcgcgcgagatttctcgcttcccggcga
accgtcgtgacatcgcggtggtggtcgcagaaaacgttcccgcagcggatattttatccgaatgtaagaaagttggcgtaaatcaggtagttggcg
taaacttatttgacgtgtaccgcggtaagggtgttgcggaggggtataagagcctcgccataagcctgatcctgcaagataccagccgtacactcg
aagaagaggagattgccgctaccgtcgccaaatgtgtagaggcattaaaagagcgattccaggcatcattgagggattga 
Met-tRNA formyltransferase, abbreviation: FMT, DNA sequence: 
atgtcagaatcactacgtattatttttgcgggtacacctgactttgcagcgcgtcatctcgacgcgctgttgtcttctggtcataacgtcgttggcgtgt
tcacccagccagaccgaccggcaggacgcggtaaaaaactgatgcccagcccggttaaagttctggctgaggaaaaaggtctgcccgtttttcaa
cctgtttccctgcgtccacaagaaaaccagcaactggtcgccgaactgcaagctgatgttatggtcgtcgtcgcctatggtttaattctgccgaaag
cagtgctggagatgccgcgtcttggctgtatcaacgttcatggttcactgctgccacgctggcgcggtgctgcaccaatccaacgctcactatgggc
gggtgatgcagaaactggtgtgaccattatgcaaatggatgtcggtttagacaccggtgatatgctctataagctctcctgcccgattaccgcagaa
gataccagtggtacgctgtacgacaagctggcagagcttggcccacaagggcttatcaccacgttgaaacaactggcagacggcacggcgaaac
cagaagttcaggacgaaactcttgtcacttacgccgagaagttgagtaaagaagaagcgcgtattgactggtcactttcggcagcacagcttgaa
cgctgcattcgcgctttcaatccatggccaatgagctggctggaaattgaaggacagccggttaaagtctggaaagcatcggtcattgatacggca
accaacgctgcaccaggaacgatccttgaagccaacaaacaaggcattcaggttgcgactggtgatggcatcctgaacctgctctcgttacaacct
gcgggtaagaaagcgatgagcgcgcaagacctcctgaactctcgtcgggaatggtttgttccgggcaaccgtctggtccaccaccaccaccacca
ctaa 
Translational elongation factor Ts, abbreviation: EF-Ts, DNA sequence: 
atggctgaaattaccgcatccctggtaaaagagctgcgtgagcgtactggcgcaggcatgatggattgcaaaaaagcactgactgaagctaacgg
cgacatcgagctggcaatcgaaaacatgcgtaagtccggtgctattaaagcagcgaaaaaagcaggcaacgttgctgctgacggcgtgatcaaa
accaaaatcgacggcaactacggcatcattctggaagttaactgccagactgacttcgttgcaaaagacgctggtttccaggcgttcgcagacaaa
gttctggacgcagctgttgctggcaaaatcactgacgttgaagttctgaaagcacagttcgaagaagaacgtgttgcgctggtagcgaaaattggt
gaaaacatcaacattcgccgcgttgctgcgctggaaggcgacgttctgggttcttatcagcacggtgcgcgtatcggcgttctggttgctgctaaag
gcgctgacgaagagctggttaaacacatcgctatgcacgttgctgcaagcaagccagagttcatcaaaccggaagacgtatccgctgaagtggta
gaaaaagaataccaggtacagctggatatcgcgatgcagtctggtaagccgaaagaaatcgcagagaaaatggttgaaggccgcatgaagaag
ttcaccggcgaagtttctctgaccggtcagccgttcgttatggaaccaagcaaaactgttggtcagctgctgaaagagcataacgctgaagtgact
ggcttcatccgcttcgaagtgggtgaaggcatcgagaaagttgagactgactttgcagcagaagttgctgcgatgtccaagcagtctcaccaccac
caccaccactaa 
Translational initiation factor 3, abbreviation: IF3, DNA sequence: 
atgcaccaccaccaccaccacaaaggcggaaaacgagttcaaacggcgcgccctaaccgtatcaatggcgaaattcgcgcccaggaagttcgct
taacaggtctggaaggcgagcagcttggtattgtgagtctgagagaagctctggagaaagcagaagaagccggagtagacttagtcgagatcag
ccctaacgccgagccgccggtttgtcgtataatggattacggcaaattcctctatgaaaagagcaagtcttctaaggaacagaagaaaaagcaaa
aagttatccaggttaaggaaattaaattccgtcctggtacagatgaaggcgactatcaggtaaaactccgcagcctgattcgctttctcgaagagg
gtgataaagccaaaatcacgctgcgtttccgcggtcgtgagatggcgcaccagcaaatcggtatggaagtgcttaatcgcgtgaaagacgatttgc
aagaactggcagtggtcgaatccttcccaacgaagatcgaaggccgccagatgatcatggtgctcgctcctaagaagaaacagtaa 
Translational initiation factor 1, abbreviation: IF1, DNA sequence: 
atgcaccaccaccaccaccacgcgaaagaagataatattgaaatgcaaggcacggtcctcgaaacgcttccgaacacgatgttccgggtcgagct
cgaaaacggccacgtcgtgacggcgcatatctcgggcaaaatgcgcaaaaactacatccggatcctgaccggcgacaaggtcaccgtcgaactc
acgccgtacgacctctcgaaaggccgcatcgtcttccgctcgcgctaa 
Asp-tRNA synthetase, abbreviation: AspRS, DNA sequence: 
atgcgtacagaatattgtggacagctccgtttgtcccacgtggggcagcaggtgactctgtgtggttgggtcaaccgtcgtcgtgatcttggtagcct
gatcttcatcgatatgcgcgaccgcgaaggtatcgtgcaggtatttttcgatccggatcgtgcggacgcgttaaagctggcctctgaactgcgtaat
gagttctgcattcaggtcacgggcaccgtacgtgcgcgtgacgaaaaaaatattaaccgcgatatggcgaccggcgaaatcgaagtgctggcgtc
ctcgctgactatcatcaaccgcgcagatgttctgccgcttgactctaaccacgtcaacaccgaagaagcgcgtctgaaataccgctacctcgacctg
cgtcgtccggaaatggctcagcgcctgaaaacccgcgctaaaatcaccagcctggtgcgccgttttatggatgaccacggcttcctcgacatcgaa
actccgatgctgaccaaagccacgccggaaggcgcgcgtgactacctggtgccttctcgtgtgcacaaaggtaagttctacgcactgccgcaatcc
ccgcagttgttcaaacagctgctgatgatgtccggttttgaccgttactatcagatcgttaaatgcttccgtgacgaagacctgcgtgctgaccgtca
gcctgagtttactcagatcgatgtggaaacttctttcatgaccgcgccgcaagtgcgtgaagtgatggaagcgctggtgcgtcatctgtggctggaa
gtgaagggtgtggatctgggcgatttcccggtaatgacctttgcggaagcagaacgccgttatggttctgataaaccggatctgcgtaacccgatg
gaactgactgacgttgctgatctgctgaaatctgttgagtttgctgtatttgcaggtccggcgaacgatccgaaaggtcgcgtagcggctctgcgcgt
tccgggcggcgcatcgctgacccgtaagcagatcgacgaatacggtaacttcgttaaaatctacggcgcgaaaggtctggcttacatcaaagttaa
cgaacgcgcgaaaggtctggaaggtatcaacagcccggtagcgaagttccttaatgcagaaatcatcgaagacatcctggatcgtactgccgcgc
aagatggcgatatgattttcttcggtgccgacaacaagaaaattgttgccgacgcgatgggtgcactgcgcctgaaagtgggtaaagaccttggtc
tgaccgacgaaagcaaatgggcaccgctgtgggttatcgacttcccgatgtttgaagacgacggtgaaggcggcctgacggcaatgcaccatccg
ttcacctcaccgaaagatatgacggcggcagaactgaaagctgcaccggaaaatgcggtggcgaacgcttacgatatggtcatcaatggttacga
agtgggcggtggttcagtacgtatccataatggtgatatgcagcagacggtgtttggtattctgggtatcaacgaagaggaacagcgcgagaagtt
cggcttcctgctcgacgctctgaaatacggtactccgccgcacgcaggtctggcattcggtcttgaccgtctgaccatgctgctgaccggcaccgac
aatatccgtgacgttatcgccttcccgaaaaccacggcggcagcgtgtctgatgactgaagcaccgagctttgctaacccgactgcactggctgag
ctgagcattcaggttgtgaagaaggctgagaataaccaccaccaccaccaccactaa 
Pro-tRNA synthetase, abbreviation: ProRS, DNA sequence: 
atgcgtactagccaatacctgctctccactctcaaggagacacctgccgacgccgaggtgatcagccatcagctgatgctgcgcgccgggatgatc
cgcaagctggcctccgggttatatacctggctgccgaccggcgtgcgcgttctgaaaaaagtcgaaaacatcgtgcgtgaagagatgaacaacgc
cggtgcgatcgaggtgtcgatgccggtggttcagccagccgatttgtggcaagagagtggtcgttgggaacagtacggtccggaactgctgcgttt
tgttgaccgtggcgagcgtccgttcgtactcggcccaactcatgaagaagttatcactgacctgattcgtaacgagcttagctcttacaaacagctg
ccgctgaacttctatcagatccagaccaagttccgcgacgaagtgcgtccgcgtttcggcgtcatgcgttcccgcgagttcctgatgaaagatgctt
actctttccatacttctcaggaatccctgcaagaaacctacgatgcaatgtatgcggcctacagcaaaatcttcagccgcatggggctggatttccg
cgccgtacaagccgacaccggttctatcggcggcagcgcctctcacgagttccaggtgctggcgcagagcggtgaagacgatgtggtcttctccga
cacctctgactatgcagcgaacattgaactggcagaagctatcgcgccgaaagaaccgcgcgctgctgctacccaggaaatgacgctggttgata
cgccgaacgcgaaaaccatcgcggaactggttgaacagttcaatctgccgattgagaaaacggttaagactctgctggttaaagcggttgaaggc
agcagcttcccgcaggttgcgctgctggtgcgcggtgatcacgagctgaacgaagttaaagcagaaaaactgccgcaggttgcaagcccgctgac
tttcgcgaccgaagaagaaatccgtgccgtggttaaagccggtccgggttcactgggtccggtaaacatgccgattccggtggtgattgaccgtac
cgttgcggcgatgagtgatttcgctgctggtgctaacatcgatggtaaacactacttcggcatcaactgggatcgcgatgtcgctaccccggaagtt
gcagatatccgtaacgtggtggctggcgatccaagcccggatggccagggtaggctgctgatcaaacgtggtatcgaagttggtcacatcttccag
ctgggtaccaagtactccgaagcactgaaagcctccgtacagggtgaagatggccgtaaccaaatcctgacgatgggttgctacggtatcggggt
aacgcgtgtggtagctgcggcgattgagcagaactacgacgaacgaggcatcgtatggcctgacgctatcgcgccgttccaggtggcgattctgcc
gatgaacatgcacaaatccttccgcgtacaagagcttgctgagaaactgtacagcgaactgcgtgcacaaggtatcgaagtgctgctggatgacc
gcaaagagcgtccgggcgtgatgtttgctgatatggaactgatcggtattccgcacactattgtgctgggcgaccgtaacctcgacaacgacgata
tcgaatataaatatcgtcgcaacggcgagaaacagttaattaagactggtgacatcgtcgaatatctggtgaaacagattaaaggccaccaccac
caccaccactaa 
Gly-tRNA synthetase α, abbreviation: GlyRS α, DNA sequence: 
atgatgcaaaagtttgataccaggaccttccagggcttgatcctgaccttacaggattactgggctcgccagggctgcaccattgttcaaccattgg
acatggaagtcggcgcgggaacctctcacccaatgacctgtctgcgcgagctggggccagaaccgatggcggctgcttatgttcagccttctcgtc
gcccgaccgatggtcgctacggcgaaaaccccaaccgtttacagcactactatcagttccaggtggtcattaagccatcgccggacaatattcagg
agctgtacctcggttctctgaaagagctgggcatggacccgactattcacgacatccgtttcgtggaagataactgggaaaacccgacgctgggtg
cctggggactgggctgggaagtgtggctgaacggcatggaagtgacgcagttcacttacttccagcaggttggtggtctggagtgtaaaccggtta
ccggcgagatcacctacggtctggaacgtctggccatgtacattcagggcgtagacagcgtttacgacctggtctggagcgacggcccgctgggta
aaaccacctacggcgacgtgttccatcagaacgaagtggagcagtccacttacaacttcgaatacgcggatgtggacttcctgttcacctgcttcga
gcagtacgagaaagaagcgcagcagctgctggcgctggaaaatccgctgccgctgccagcctacgagcgtattctgaaagccgcccacagcttc
aacctgctggatgcgcgtaaagccatctccgtcaccgagcgtcagcgctacattctgcgcattcgcaccctgaccaaagcagtggcagaagcatac
tacgcttcccgtgaagccctcggcttcccgatgtgcaacaaagataagtaa 
Gly-tRNA synthetase β, abbreviation: GlyRS β, DNA sequence: 
atgtctgagaaaacttttctggtggaaatcggcactgaagagctgccaccaaaagcactgcgcagcctggctgagtcctttgctgcgaactttactg
cggagctggataacgctggcctcgcacacggcaccgttcaatggtttgctgctccgcgtcgtctggcgctgaaagtagctaacctggcggaagcgc
aaccggatcgtgaaatcgaaaaacgcggcccggcgattgcccaggcgttcgacgctgaaggcaaaccgagcaaagcggcagaaggttgggcgc
gtggttgcggtattaccgttgaccaggctgagcgtctgactaccgataaaggcgaatggctgctgtatcgcgcccatgtgaagggcgaaagcaccg
aagcactgctgccgaatatggttgcgacttctctggcgaaactgccgatcccgaaactgatgcgttggggcgcaagcgacgtgcacttcgtgcgtc
cggtgcacaccgtgaccctgctgctgggcgacaaagtcattccggcaaccattctgggcattcagtccgatcgcgtgattcgcggccaccgctttat
gggcgagccggagttcaccatcgataacgccgatcagtatccggaaatcctgcgtgagcgtgggaaagtcatcgccgattacgaagaacgtaag
gcgaagattaaagccgatgccgaagaagcagcgcgtaagattggcggtaacgctgacttaagcgaaagcctgctggaagaagtggcttcgctgg
tggagtggccggtcgttctgaccgcaaagttcgaagagaagttcctcgcggtgccggctgaagcgctggtttacaccatgaaaggtgaccagaaa
tacttcccggtgtatgcgaacgacggcaaactgctgccgaactttatcttcgttgccaacatcgaatcgaaagatccgcagcagattatctccggta
acgagaaagtcgttcgtccgcgtctggcggatgccgagttcttcttcaacaccgaccgtaaaaaacgtcttgaagataacctgccgcgcctgcaaa
ccgtgttgttccagcaacagttggggacgctgcgcgacaaaactgaccgcatccaggcgctggctggctggattgctgaacagattggcgctgacg
ttaaccacgctacccgtgcgggtctgctgtctaagtgcgacctgatgaccaacatggtcttcgagttcaccgacacccagggcgttatggggatgca
ctatgcgcgtcacgatggcgaagcggaagatgtcgcggtggcgctgaatgagcagtatcagccgcgttttgctggtgatgacctgccgtccaaccc
agtagcttgtgcgctggcgattgctgacaagatggataccctggcgggtatcttcggtatcggtcagcatccgaaaggcgacaaagacccgtttgc
gctgcgtcgtgccgcgcttggcgtgctgcgaattatcgttgagaagaacctcaaccttgatctgcaaacgctgaccgaagaagcggtgcgtctgtat
ggcgataagctgactaatgccaacgtagttgatgatgttatcgactttatgctcggtcgcttccgcgcctggtatcaggacgaaggttataccgttga
caccatccaggcggtactggcgcgtcgtccgactcgtccggctgatttcgatgcccgtatgaaagcggtatcgcatttccgtaccctggatgcagct
gctgcactggcggcggcgaacaaacgtgtatctaacattctggcgaaatctgacgaagtgctgagcgaccgcgtgaatgcctctaccctgaaaga
gccggaagaaattaaactggcgatgcaggttgtggtgctacgtgacaagctggagccgtactttacggaaggtcgttaccaggatgcgctggtcg
aactggctgagctgcgtgaaccggttgatgctttcttcgataaagtgatggtcatggttgatgacaaagaattgcgtatcaaccgtctgaccatgct
ggagaaactgcgcgaactgttcctgcgcgttgcggatatttcgctgttgcaacaccaccaccaccaccactaa 
Glu-tRNA synthetase, abbreviation: GluRS, DNA sequence: 
atgaaaatcaaaactcgcttcgcgccaagcccaacaggctatctgcacgttggcggcgcgcgtactgctctttactcctggctttttgcacgtaacc
acggcggtgagttcgtgctgcgtattgaagacaccgatcttgagcgttccacgccggaagctatcgaagccattatggatggcatgaactggctga
gcctggagtgggatgaaggtccgtactaccagaccaaacgttttgatcgctacaacgcggtgatcgatcagatgctggaagagggcactgcttata
aatgctattgctctaaagagcgcctggaagcgctgcgcgaagagcaaatggcgaaaggtgagaagccgcgttatgacggtcgctgccgccacag
ccatgagcatcatgctgatgatgaaccgtgtgttgtacgttttgctaacccgcaggaaggttctgttgtttttgacgatcagatccgtggtccgatcga
gttcagcaaccaggaactggacgatcttattatccgccgtaccgatggttccccaacctataacttctgtgtggttgtcgatgactgggatatggaaa
tcacccacgttatccgtggcgaagaccatatcaacaacacgccacgccagatcaacattcttaaggccctgaaagcgccggtgccggtttacgcgc
acgtttctatgatcaatggcgatgacggtaaaaaactgtccaaacgtcacggggcagtcagcgtaatgcagtatcgtgatgacggttatttgccag
aagcactgctgaactatctggtgcgtctgggctggtcccacggcgatcaggaaatcttcactcgtgaagagatgatcaaatacttcactttgaatgc
cgtcagcaaatctgccagtgcgttcaacaccgacaagctgctgtggctgaaccatcactacattaacgcgctgccgccggagtatgttgctactcac
ttacagtggcacattgagcaggaaaatatcgatacccgtaacggcccgcagctggctgatctggtgaaactgctgggcgaacgctgcaagacgct
gaaagagatggcacagagctgccgttatttctacgaagattttgctgagttcgatgccgacgccgcgaaaaaacatctgcgtccggtagcgcgtca
gccgctggaagtggttcgtgacaaactggccgcgattactgactggaccgctgaaaacgttcatcacgctattcaggcgacggcggatgagctgg
aagtgggtatgggtaaagttggtatgccgctgcgtgtcgccgtaaccggtgcggggcagtctccagcactggatgttaccgttcacgcaatcggta
agacccgcagtatcgagcgtatcaacaaagcgctggattttattgctgaacgcgaaaatcagcagcaccaccaccaccaccactaa 
Translational release factor 3, abbreviation: RF3, DNA sequence: 
atgcaccaccaccaccaccacacgttgtctccttatttgcaagaggtggcgaagcgccgcacttttgccattatttctcacccggacgccggtaaga
ctaccatcaccgagaaggtgctgctgttcggacaggccattcagaccgccggtacagtaaaaggccgtggttccaaccagcacgctaagtcggac
tggatggagatggaaaagcagcgtgggatctccattactacgtctgtgatgcagtttccgtatcacgattgcctggttaacctgctcgacaccccgg
ggcacgaagacttctcggaagatacctatcgtaccctgacggcggtggactgctgcctgatggttatcgacgccgcaaaaggtgttgaagatcgta
cccgtaagctgatggaagttacccgtctgcgcgacacgccgatcctcacctttatgaacaaacttgaccgtgatatccgcgacccgatggagctgct
cgatgaagttgagaacgagctgaaaatcggctgtgcgccgatcacctggccgattggctgcggcaagctgtttaaaggcgtttaccacctttataa
agacgaaacctatctctatcagagcggtaaaggccacaccattcaggaagtccgcattgttaaagggctgaataacccggatctcgatgctgcggt
tggtgaagatctggcacagcagctgcgtgacgaactggaactggtgaaaggcgcgtctaacgagttcgacaaagagctgttccttgcgggcgaaa
tcactccggtattcttcggtactgcgctgggtaacttcggcgtcgatcacatgttggatggcctggtggagtgggcacctgcgccgatgccgcgtcag
actgatacccgtaccgtagaagcgagcgaagataagtttaccggcttcgtatttaaaatccaggccaacatggacccgaaacaccgcgaccgcgt
ggcgtttatgcgtgtggtgtccggtaaatatgaaaaaggcatgaaactgcgccaggtgcgcactgcgaaagatgtggtgatctccgacgcgctga
cctttatggcgggtgaccgttcgcacgttgaagaagcgtatccgggcgatatcctcggcctgcacaaccacggcaccattcagatcggcgacacct
ttacccagggtgagatgatgaagttcaccggtattccgaacttcgcaccagaactgttccgtcgtatccgcctgaaagatccgctgaagcaaaaac
agctgctcaaagggctggtacagctttccgaagagggcgcggtgcaggtgttccgtccaatctccaacaacgatctgatcgttggtgcagttggtgt
gctgcaatttgatgtggtggtagcgcgcctgaagagcgaatacaacgttgaagcagtgtatgagtcagtcaacgttgccactgcccgctgggtaga
atgtgcagacgcgaagaagttcgaagagttcaagcgtaagaacgaaagccaactggcgcttgatggcggcgataacctcgcttacatcgctacca
gcatggtcaacctgcgcctggcacaggaacgttatccggacgttcagttccaccagacccgcgagcattaa 
Translational release factor 2, abbreviation: RF2, DNA sequence: 
atgtttgaaattaatccggtaaataatcgcattcaggacctcacggaacgctccgacgttcttagggggtatcttgactacgacgccaagaaagag
cgtctggaagaagtaaacgccgagctggaacagccggatgtctggaacgaacccgaacgcgcacaggcgctgggtaaagagcgttcctccctcg
aagccgttgtcgacaccctcgaccaaatgaaacaggggctggaagatgtttctggtctgctggaactggctgtagaagctgacgacgaagaaacc
tttaacgaagccgttgctgaactcgacgccctggaagaaaaactggcgcagcttgagttccgccgtatgttctctggcgaatatgacagcgccgac
tgctacctcgatattcaggcggggtctggcggtacggaagcacaggactgggcgagcatgcttgagcgtatgtatctgcgctgggcagaatcgcgt
ggtttcaaaactgaaatcatcgaagagtcggaaggtgaagtggcgggtattaaatccgtgacgatcaaaatctccggcgattacgcttacggctg
gctgcgtacagaaaccggcgttcaccgcctggtgcgtaaaagcccgtttgactccggcggtcgtcgccacacgtcgttcagctccgcgtttgtttatc
cggaagttgatgatgatattgatatcgaaatcaacccggcggatctgcgcattgacgtttatcgcgcgtccggcgcgggcggtcagcacgttaacc
gtaccgaatctgcggtgcgtattacccacatcccgaccgggatcgtgacccagtgccagaacgaccgttcccagcacaagaacaaagatcaggcc
atgaagcagatgaaagcgaagctttatgaactggagatgcagaagaaaaatgccgagaaacaggcgatggaagataacaaatccgacatcgg
ctggggcagccagattcgttcttatgtccttgatgactcccgcattaaagatctgcgcaccggggtagaaacccgcaacacgcaggccgtgctgga
cggcagcctggatcaatttatcgaagcaagtttgaaagcagggttacaccaccaccaccaccactaa 
Ribosome recycling factor, abbreviation: RRF, DNA sequence: 
atgattagcgatatcagaaaagatgctgaagtacgcatggacaaatgcgtagaagcgttcaaaacccaaatcagcaaaatacgcacgggtcgtg
cttctcccagcctgctggatggcattgtcgtggaatattacggcacgccgacgccgctgcgtcagctggcaagcgtaacggtagaagattcccgta
cactgaaaatcaacgtgtttgatcgttcaatgtctccggccgttgaaaaagcgattatggcgtccgatcttggcctgaacccgaactctgcgggtag
cgacatccgtgttccgctgccgccgctgacggaagaacgtcgtaaagatctgaccaaaatcgttcgtggtgaagcagaacaagcgcgtgttgcag
tacgtaacgtgcgtcgtgacgcgaacgacaaagtgaaagcactgttgaaagataaagagatcagcgaagacgacgatcgccgttctcaggacga
tgtacagaaactgactgatgctgcaatcaagaaaattgaagcggcgctggcagacaaagaagcagaactgatgcagttccaccaccaccaccac
cactaa 
Translational elongation factor G, abbreviation: EF-G, DNA sequence: 
atggctcgtacaacacccatcgcacgctaccgtaacatcggtatcagtgcgcacatcgacgccggtaaaaccactactaccgaacgtattctgttct
acaccggtgtaaaccataaaatcggtgaagttcatgacggcgctgcaaccatggactggatggagcaggagcaggaacgtggtattaccatcact
tccgctgcgactactgcattctggtctggtatggctaagcagtatgagccgcatcgcatcaacatcatcgacaccccggggcacgttgacttcacaa
tcgaagtagaacgttccatgcgtgttctcgatggtgcggtaatggtttactgcgcagttggtggtgttcagccgcagtctgaaaccgtatggcgtcag
gcaaacaaatataaagttccgcgcattgcgttcgttaacaaaatggaccgcatgggtgcgaacttcctgaaagttgttaaccagatcaaaacccgt
ctgggcgcgaacccggttccgctgcacctggcgattggtgctgaagaacatttcaccggtgttgttgacctggtgaaaatgaaagctatcaactgg
aacgacgctgaccagggcgtaaccttcgaatacgaagatatcccggcagacatggttgaactggctaacgaatggcaccagaacctgatcgaat
ccgcagctgaagcttctgaagagctgatggaaaaatacctgggtggtgaagaactgactgaagcagaaatcaaaggtgctctgcgtcagcgcgtt
ctgaacaacgaaatcatcctggtaacctgtggttctgcgttcaagaacaaaggtgttcaggcgatgctggatgcggtaattgattacctgccatccc
cggttgacgtacctgcgatcaacggtatcctggacgacggtaaagacactccggctgaacgtcacgcaagtgatgacgagccgttctctgcactgg
cgttcaaaatcgctaccgacccgtttgttggtaacctgaccttcttccgtgtttactccggtgtggttaactctggtgataccgtactgaactccgtga
aagctgcacgtgagcgtttcggtcgtatcgttcagatgcacgctaacaaacgtgaagagatcaaagaagttcgcgcgggcgacatcgctgctgct
atcggtctgaaagacgtaaccactggtgacaccctgtgtgacccggatgcgccgatcattctggaacgtatggagttccctgagccggtaatctcca
tcgcagttgaaccgaaaaccaaagctgaccaggaaaaaatgggtctggctctgggccgtctggctaaagaagacccgtctttccgtgtatggact
gacgaagaatctaaccagaccatcatcgcgggtatgggcgaactgcacctcgacatcatcgttgaccgtatgaagcgtgagttcaacgttgaagc
gaacgtaggtaaaccgcaggttgcttaccgtgaaactatccgccagaaagttaccgatgttgaaggtaaacacgcgaaacagtctggtggtcgtg
gtcagtatggtcatgttgttatcgacatgtacccgctggagccgggttcaaacccgaaaggctacgagttcatcaacgacattaaaggtggtgtaat
ccctggcgaatacatcccggccgttgataaaggtatccaggaacagctgaaagcaggtccgctggcaggctacccggtagtagacatgggtattc
gtctgcacttcggttcttaccatgacgttgactcctctgaactggcgtttaaactggctgcttctatcgcctttaaagaaggctttaagaaagcgaaa
ccagttctgcttgagccgatcatgaaggttgaagtagaaactccggaagagaacaccggtgacgttatcggtgacttgagccgtcgtcgtggtatg
ctcaaaggtcaggaatctgaagttactggcgttaagatccacgctgaagtaccgctgtctgaaatgttcggatacgcaactcagctgcgttctctga
ccaaaggtcgtgcatcatacactatggagttcctgaagtatgatgaagcgccgagtaacgttgctcaggccgtaattgaagcccgtggtaaacacc
accaccaccaccactaa 
Translational initiation factor 2, abbreviation: IF2, DNA sequence: 
atgcaccaccaccaccaccacacagatgtaacgattaaaacgctggccgcagagcgacagacctccgtggaacgcctggtacagcaatttgctg
atgcaggtatccggaagtctgctgacgactctgtgtctgcacaagagaaacagactttgattgaccacctgaatcagaaaaactcaggcccggac
aaattgacgctgcaacgtaaaacacgcagcacccttaacattcctggtaccggtggaaaaagcaaatcggtacaaatcgaagtccgcaagaaac
gcacctttgtgaaacgcgatccgcaagaggctgaacgccttgcagcggaagagcaagcgcagcgtgaagcggaagagcaagcccgtcgtgagg
cagaagaatcggctaaacgcgaggcgcaacaaaaagctgaacgtgaggccgcagaacaagctaagcgtgaagctgctgaacaagcgaaacgt
gaagctgcggaaaaagacaaagtgagcaatcaacaagacgatatgactaaaaacgcccaggctgaaaaagcccgccgtgagcaggaagctgc
ggagctcaagcgtaaagctgaagaagaagcgcgtcgtaaactcgaagaagaagcacgtcgcgttgctgaagaagcacgtcgtatggcggaaga
aaacaaatggactgataacgcggaaccgactgaagattccagcgattatcacgtcactacttctcaacatgctcgccaggcagaagacgaaagc
gatcgtgaagtcgaaggcggccgtggccgtggtcgtaacgcgaaagcagcgcgtccgaagaaaggcaacaaacacgctgaatcaaaagctgat
cgtgaagaagcacgcgcagcagtacgtggcggtaaaggcggaaaacgtaaaggttcttcgctgcaacaaggcttccagaagcctgctcaggccg
ttaaccgtgacgttgtgatcggcgaaactatcaccgttggcgaactggcgaacaagatggcggttaaaggctctcaggtcatcaaagcgatgatg
aaactgggcgcaatggcaaccatcaaccaggttatcgatcaggaaaccgcacagctggttgctgaagagatgggccataaagttatcctgcgtcg
tgaaaacgagctggaagaggcggtaatgagcgaccgtgacacgggtgctgcggctgaaccgcgcgcgccggttgtgaccatcatgggtcacgtt
gaccacggtaaaacctctctgctggactacattcgttcaacgaaagtggcctctggcgaagcgggcggcattacccagcacattggtgcataccac
gttgaaactgaaaacggcatgatcaccttcctggacaccccggggcacgccgcgtttacttcaatgcgtgctcgtggtgcgcaggcaacggacatc
gtagtcctggttgttgctgccgacgacggtgtgatgccgcagaccatcgaagcaatccagcacgcgaaagcggcgcaggtaccggtggtggttgc
agtgaacaagatcgataaaccagaagctgatccggatcgcgttaagaacgaactctcccagtacggcatcctgccggaagagtggggcggtgaa
agccagttcgtacacgtatctgcgaaagcgggtaccggtatcgatgaactgctggacgctatcctgctgcaagcggaagttctggagctgaaagcg
gtacgtaaaggtatggcgagcggtgcggttatcgaatccttcctcgataaaggtcgtggtccggttgctaccgttctggtacgtgaaggtactctgc
acaagggcgatatcgttctgtgtggcttcgaatacggtcgtgttcgtgcgatgcgtaacgaactgggtcaggaagtgctggaagcgggtccgtcca
ttccggtggaaatcctcggcctgtccggcgtaccggctgcgggtgatgaagttaccgttgtacgtgacgagaagaaagcgcgtgaagttgcactct
atcgtcagggtaagttccgcgaagttaaactggcgcgtcagcagaaatctaaactcgagaacatgttcgccaacatgaccgaaggcgaagttcac
gaagtgaatatcgtcctgaaggcagacgtacagggttctgtcgaagcgatctccgactccttgctgaaactgtctactgacgaagttaaagtgaag
atcatcggttctggcgtaggtggtatcaccgaaaccgacgccaccctggctgcggcgtccaacgccatcctggttggctttaacgtacgtgctgatg
cctctgcacgtaaagtgattgaagcggaaagcctggatctgcgttactactccgtcatctataacctgattgacgaagtgaaagcggcgatgagcg
gtatgctgtctccggaactgaaacagcagattatcggtctggcggaagttcgtgacgtgttcaaatcgccgaagtttggtgccatcgcaggctgtat
ggttaccgaaggtgtggttaaacgtcacaacccgatccgcgttctgcgtgacaacgtggttatctacgaaggcgagctggagtccctgcgccgcttc
aaagatgacgttaacgaagtccgtaacggtatggaatgtggtatcggcgttaagaactacaacgacgtccgcactggcgatgtgatcgaagtatt
cgaaatcatcgagatccaacgtaccattgcttaa 
αHL His, DNA sequence: 
atggcagattctgatattaatattaaaaccggtactacagatattggaagcaatactacagtaaaaacaggtgatttagtcacttatgataaagaa
aatggcatgcacaaaaaagtattttatagttttatcgatgataaaaatcacaataaaaaactgctagttattagaacgaaaggtaccattgctggt
caatatagagtttatagcgaagaaggtgctaacaaaagtggtttagcctggccttcagcctttaaggtacagttgcaactacctgataatgaagta
gctcaaatatctgattactatccaagaaattcgattgatacaaaagagtatatgagtactttaacttatggattcaacggtaatgttactggtgatga
tggcggaagtcatcatcaccatcaccatggtgggtcaaaaattggcggccttattggtgcaaatgtttcgattggtcatacactgaaatatgttcaa
cctgatttcaaaacaattttagagagcccaactgataaaaaagtaggctggaaagtgatatttaacaatatggtgaatcaaaattggggaccatat
gatagagattcttggaacccggtatatggcaatcaacttttcatgaaaactagaaatggttctatgaaagcagcagagaacttccttgatcctaaca
aagcaagttctctattatcttcagggttttcaccagacttcgctacagttattactatggatagaaaagcatccaaacaacaaacaaatatagatgt
aatatacgaacgagttcgtgatgactaccaattgcattggacttcaacaaattggaaaggtaccaatactaaagataaatggacagatcgttcttc
agaaagatataaaatcgattgggaaaaagaagaaatgacaaatggcggcagcagtggtggcagtagtggtggtgcacacattgtgatggttgat
gcgtacaaaccgaccaagaagggtcatcatcaccatcaccattga 
αHL FLAG, DNA sequence: 
atggcagattctgatattaatattaaaaccggtactacagatattggaagcaatactacagtaaaaacaggtgatttagtcacttatgataaagaa
aatggcatgcacaaaaaagtattttatagttttatcgatgataaaaatcacaataaaaaactgctagttattagaacgaaaggtaccattgctggt
caatatagagtttatagcgaagaaggtgctaacaaaagtggtttagcctggccttcagcctttaaggtacagttgcaactacctgataatgaagta
gctcaaatatctgattactatccaagaaattcgattgatacaaaagagtatatgagtactttaacttatggattcaacggtaatgttactggtgatga
tggcggaagtgattacaaagacgatgacgataagggtgggtcaaaaattggcggccttattggtgcaaatgtttcgattggtcatacactgaaata
tgttcaacctgatttcaaaacaattttagagagcccaactgataaaaaagtaggctggaaagtgatatttaacaatatggtgaatcaaaattgggg
accatatgatagagattcttggaacccggtatatggcaatcaacttttcatgaaaactagaaatggttctatgaaagcagcagagaacttccttgat
cctaacaaagcaagttctctattatcttcagggttttcaccagacttcgctacagttattactatggatagaaaagcatccaaacaacaaacaaata
tagatgtaatatacgaacgagttcgtgatgactaccaattgcattggacttcaacaaattggaaaggtaccaatactaaagataaatggacagatc
gttcttcagaaagatataaaatcgattgggaaaaagaagaaatgacaaatggcggcagcagtggtggcagtagtggtggtgcacacattgtgat
ggttgatgcgtacaaaccgaccaagaagggtcatcatcaccatcaccattga 
Phi29 DNA polymerase, DNA sequence: 
atgccgagaaagatgtatagttgtgactttgagacaactactaaagtggaagactgtagggtatgggcgtatggttatatgaatatagaagatcac
agtgagtacaaaataggtaatagcctggatgagtttatggcgtgggtgttgaaggtacaagctgatctatatttccataacctcaaatttgacggag
cttttatcattaactggttggaacgtaatggttttaagtggtcggctgacggattgccaaacacatataatacgatcatatctcgcatgggacaatgg
tacatgattgatatatgtttaggctacaaagggaaacgtaagatacatacagtgatatatgacagcttaaagaaactaccgtttcctgttaagaag
atagctaaagactttaaactaactgttcttaaaggtgatattgattaccacaaagaaagaccagtcggctataagataacacccgaagaatacgc
ctatattaaaaacgatattcagattattgcggaagctctgttaattcagtttaagcaaggtttagaccggatgacagcaggcagtgacagtctaaaa
ggtttcaaggatattataaccactaagaaattcaaaaaggtgtttcctacattgagtcttggactcgataaggaagtgagatacgcctatagaggt
ggttttacatggttaaatgataggttcaaagaaaaagaaatcggagaaggcatggtcttcgatgttaatagtctatatcctgcacagatgtatagcc
gtctccttccatatggtgaacctatagtattcgagggtaaatacgtttgggacgaagattacccactacacatacagcatatcagatgtgagttcga
attgaaagagggctatatacccactatacagataaaaagaagtaggttttataaaggtaatgagtacctaaaaagtagcggcggggagatagcc
gacctctggttgtcaaatgtagacctagaattaatgaaagaacactacgatttatataacgttgaatatatcagcggcttaaaatttaaagcaacta
caggtttgtttaaagattttatagataaatggacgtacatcaagacgacatcagaaggagcgatcaagcaactagcaaaactgatgttaaacagt
ctatacggtaaattcgctagtaaccctgatgttacagggaaagtcccttatttaaaagagaatggggcgctaggtttcagacttggagaagaggaa
acaaaagaccctgtttatacacctatgggcgttttcatcactgcatgggctagatacacgacaattacagcggcacaggcttgttatgatcggataa
tatactgtgatactgacagcatacatttaacgggtacagagatacctgatgtaataaaagatatagttgaccctaagaaattgggatactgggcac
atgaaagtacattcaaaagagctaaatatctgagacagaagacctatatacaagacatctatatgaaagaagtagatggtaagttagtagaagg
tagtccagatgattacactgatataaaatttagtgttaaatgtgcgggaatgactgacaagattaagaaagaggttacgtttgagaatttcaaagtc
ggattcagtcggaaaatgaagcctaagcctgtgcaagtgccgggcggggtggttctggttgatgacacattcacaatcaaataaa 
 
Table S7: DNA sequences of synthetic cell genome translation factor genes. The sequences for pLD1, 
pLD2 and pLD3 are from 65. 
  
Table S8 
 
 
plasmid 
concentration 1nM 5nM 10nM 15nM 
average copy 
number 1.06 5.32 10.64 15.96 
 
Table S8. Conversion of plasmid concentration to plasmid copy number. 
The table is prepared for 1.5μm liposomes with 1mM lipids, assuming volume of 1.77 fL per liposome.   
Table S9 
 New GFP 
DNA GFP mRNA New αHL 
DNA αHL mRNA Generation 
Counter 3  
Generation 
Counter 4  
Phi29, fusion , 
Generation 3 1.0E-5; *** 9.8E-3; ** 1.4E-3; ** 2.2E-1; ns 2.3E-4; *** 7.3E-1; ns 
No Phi29, fusion 
, Generation 3 3.9E-1; ns 4.9E-1; ns 7.2E-1; ns 4.3E-1; ns 4.0E-6; *** 6.1E-1; ns 
Phi29, No Fusion   
, Generation 3 2.0E-5; *** 1.9E-2; * 3.1E-5; *** 1.5E-1; ns 8.7E-1; ns 5.6E-2; ns 
Phi29, fusion , 
Generation 4 6.4E-4; *** 5.0E-1; ns 4.1E-4; *** 3.5E-1; ns 1.4E-3; ** 2.9E-3; ** 
No Phi29, fusion 
, Generation 4 3.7E-1; ns 5.8E-1; ns 7.3E-1; ns 6.4E-1; ns 2.7E-3; ** 7.8E-7; *** 
Phi29, No Fusion   
, Generation 4 5.3E-5; *** 3.2E-1; ns 2.9E-5; *** 6.3E-1; ns 3.3E-1; ns 8.3E-1; ns 
Phi29, fusion , 
Generation 5 1.9E-4; *** 2.9E-2; * 1.3E-3; ** 3.3E-3; ** 1.9E-8; *** 8.2E-6; *** 
No Phi29, fusion   
, Generation 5 3.7E-1; ns 9.1E-1; ns 4.1E-1; ns 4.8E-1; ns 2.6E-4; *** 3.4E-5; *** 
Phi29, No Fusion   
, Generation 5 2.8E-7; *** 4.1E-3; ** 1.2E-5; *** 2.3E-2; * 8.0E-1; ns 9.2E-1; ns 
       
 Generation 
Counter 5  
new pLD1 
DNA 
new pLD2 
DNA 
new pLD3 
DNA 
new pREP 
DNA 
new 
T7RNAP 
DNA 
Phi29, fusion , 
Generation 3 4.8E-1; ns 1.6E-4; *** 2.2E-4; *** 3.7E-5; *** 2.8E-5; *** 1.5E-3; ** 
No Phi29, fusion 
, Generation 3 9.5E-1; ns 3.7E-1; ns n/a; ns n/a; ns 7.1E-1; ns 5.8E-1; ns 
Phi29, No Fusion 
, Generation 3 5.6E-1; ns 2.9E-3; ** 1.1E-2; * 6.3E-3; ** 1.0E-2; * 6.6E-3; ** 
Phi29, fusion , 
Generation 4 7.5E-1; ns 3.6E-3; ** 3.6E-3; ** 3.3E-3; ** 5.1E-4; *** 1.2E-4; *** 
No Phi29, fusion 
, Generation 4 4.2E-1; ns n/a; ns 3.7E-1; ns 3.7E-1; ns 5.4E-2; ns 1.6E-1; ns 
Phi29, No Fusion 
, Generation 4 7.4E-1; ns 1.2E-3; ** 6.5E-4; *** 6.0E-4; *** 1.1E-2; * 1.6E-4; *** 
Phi29, fusion , 
Generation 5 2.2E-5; *** 1.1E-4; *** 2.5E-3; ** 6.4E-4; *** 6.8E-4; *** 6.1E-4; *** 
No Phi29, fusion 
, Generation 5 2.0E-5; *** 1.4E-1; ns 3.7E-1; ns 3.7E-1; ns 9.5E-1; ns 5.8E-1; ns 
Phi29, No Fusion 
, Generation 5 4.4E-1; ns 2.8E-3; ** 2.5E-4; *** 5.0E-3; ** 2.4E-4; *** 2.8E-4; *** 
 

 
Table S9. Statistical analysis of cell cycle data presented as plots on Figure 3, and individual data points 
on Figure S34. P values are calculated for all conditions compared to the negative control of no Phi29 
genome replication and no feeding conditions (symbol  through the text).  
ns = P > 0.0 ; * = P ≤ 0.0 , ** = P ≤ 0.01, *** = P ≤ 0.001; n/a when results are undetectable and P value 
was not calculated.  
 
 
  

Table S10 
panel C flow cytometry 3.98E-03 ** 
panel D GFP lumen mixing 2.54E-02 * 
panel D 
FRET membrane 
mixing 8.16E-03 ** 
panel E αHL plasmid DNA 7.37E-01 ns 
panel F αHL mRNA 1.61E-02 * 
panel G GFP plasmid DNA 4.28E-01 ns 
panel H GFP mRNA 4.39E-03 ** 
 
panel K 
GFP in T7 1.61E-03 ** 
GFP in T7Max 2.35E-02 * 
 
Panel O  GFP mCherry 
phi 29, fusion  T7 GFP, T7Max mCherry 3.0E-4; *** 8.5E-5; *** 
phi 29, fusion  T7Max GFP, T7 mCherry 1.0E-3; ** 6.0E-3; ** 
no phi29, no fusion  T7 GFP, T7Max mCherry n/a; ns 8.8E-1; ns 
no phi29, no fusion  T7Max GFP, T7 mCherry 9.9E-1; ns n/a; ns 
phi 29, fusion  T7 GFP, no mCherry 6.7E-3; ** 7.5E-5; *** 
phi 29, fusion  T7Max GFP, no mCherry 9.6E-4; *** 6.6E-5; *** 
no phi29, no fusion  T7 GFP, no mCherry 5.3E-1; ns 8.6E-5; *** 
no phi29, no fusion  T7Max GFP, no mCherry 3.0E-1; ns 1.4E-4; *** 
 
Table S10. Statistical analysis of data for selection experiments. 
For data on panels C to H: Since those experiments measure competition between T7 and T7Max cells, 
the P values were calculated comparing sample set of T7αHL to T7MaxαHL (not compared to negative 
control).  
For data on panel K: the P values were calculated comparing samples with and without growth and 
division, directly comparing samples with GFP in T7 cells with and without cell cycle, and comparing 
samples with GFP in T7Max cells with and without cell cycle. 
For data on panel O: the P values calculated for GFP and for mCherry compared to the negative control: 
incubation without DNA replication and without feeding and division (symbol ) in the weaker 
promoter T7 cells.  
ns = P > 0.0 ; * = P ≤ 0.0 , ** = P ≤ 0.01, *** = P ≤ 0.001, n/a when results are undetectable and P value 
was not calculated.  

Table S11 
 
feeder 
liposomes synthetic cells 
GFP new DNA, 
panel 5C 
mCherry new 
DNA, panel 5D 
pLD1 new DNA, 
panel 5E 
1x 
T7 GFP,  
T7Max mCherry 2.8E-3; ** n/a; ns n/a; ns 
1x 
T7Max GFP,  
T7 mCherry n/a; ns 5.5E-2; ns 8.7E-1; ns 
0.5x 
T7 GFP,  
T7Max mCherry 8.6E-4; *** 3.3E-1; ns 8.3E-1; ns 
0.5x 
T7Max GFP,  
T7 mCherry 6.5E-2; ns 5.7E-3; ** 5.2E-1; ns 
0.25x 
T7 GFP,  
T7Max mCherry 1.5E-4; *** 1.3E-2; * 1.0E-2; * 
0.25x 
T7Max GFP,  
T7 mCherry 3.5E-3; ** 2.0E-3; ** 9.4E-3; ** 
0.1x 
T7 GFP,  
T7Max mCherry 7.0E-6; *** 6.9E-3; ** 3.4E-3; ** 
0.1x 
T7Max GFP,  
T7 mCherry 1.5E-4; *** 9.0E-4; *** 2.5E-3; ** 
 
Table S11. Statistical analysis of data for two populations of synthetic cells mixed in each competition 
experiment, results shown on panels C – E of Figure 5.  
ns = P > 0.0 ; * = P ≤ 0.0 , ** = P ≤ 0.01, *** = P ≤ 0.001; n/a when results are undetectable and P value 
was not calculated.  
 
 
  
Table S12 
 
washed off beads, 
panel 6H T7 T7Max 
T7 cells present, T7Max cells 
absent; division is expected 1.5E-2; * 4.8E-1; ns 
T7 cells absent, T7Max cells 
present; division is expected. n/a; ns 9.4E-3; ** 
T7 cells present, T7Max cells 
present; division is expected.  4.4E-2; * 2.3E-2; * 
Attached to beads, 
panel 6I T7 T7Max 
T7 cells present, T7Max cells 
absent; division is expected 7.2E-1; ns n/a; ns 
T7 cells absent, T7Max cells 
present; division is expected. n/a; ns 7.1E-1; ns 
T7 cells present, T7Max cells 
present; division is expected.  5.8E-1; ns 1.1E-1; ns 
 
sample 
new αHL, 
attached to 
beads, 
panel 6L 
total αHL, 
attached to 
beads, 
panel 6M 
generation 
counter, 
attached to 
beads, 
panel 6K 
new αHL, 
free off 
beads, 
panel 6O 
total αHL, 
free off 
beads, 
panel 6P 
generation 
counter, 
free off 
beads, 
panel 6N 
DNA replication; no 
growth; division  1.7E-2; * 4.7E-2; * n/a; ns 6.9E-1; ns 2.8E-1; ns 3.5E-3; ** 
DNA replication; growth; 
no division  8.4E-1; ns 7.5E-1; ns 2.2E-1; ns n/a; ns 7.0E-5; *** n/a; ns 
DNA replication; no 
growth; no division  9.8E-1; ns 1.3E-2; * 6.6E-2; ns 2.5E-2; * n/a; ns 3.7E-3; ** 
no DNA replication; 
growth; division  n/a; ns 4.7E-5; *** 4.0E-1; ns 2.6E-2; * 1.6E-3; ** 7.0E-1; ns 
no DNA replication; no 
growth; division  1.2E-3; ** 3.7E-4; *** 6.5E-2; ns 2.2E-2; * 3.0E-2; * n/a; ns 
no DNA replication; 
growth; no division  7.7E-3; ** 8.4E-4; *** 7.4E-2; ns 5.4E-3; ** 8.0E-4; *** n/a; ns 
no DNA replication; no 
growth; no division  1.2E-3; ** 1.3E-4; *** 6.4E-2; ns 2.5E-2; * 8.6E-4; *** 3.5E-3; ** 
 
Table S12. Statistical analysis of data for synthetic cells growth and division, data shown on Figure 6. 
ns = P > 0.0 ; * = P ≤ 0.0 , ** = P ≤ 0.01, *** = P ≤ 0.001; n/a when results are undetectable and P value 
was not calculated. 
 